Basic guide to buy to let
=========================

When looking at buying property to rent out rooms, you need to look at the
market closely. Do your homework. Seek professional advice. Watch out for any
scams and remember the saying “if it sounds too good to be true it probably is”.
Below are a few basics to help you on your way.

Maximise best advertising practice making this happen.

Location
--------
This is vital to the success of your project. If you want to realise the best
return on your investment, don't buy the place up the road because it’s
convenient and cheap. Visit several locations and get a feel for the area. See
if there are good transport links, schools nearby, shopping facilities etc.

Target market
-------------
Now look at the target market you are after, does this area have the demand? Are
you looking for professionals, students or low income professionals? Put
yourself in their shoes, will the property and area you choose suit your target
market, are there facilities to accommodate these markets close by i.e.
university, business or retail parks etc.

Property and expenditure
------------------------
When looking for the right property the first thing you need to do is decide on
your maximum budget, then search for properties within this figure taking into
account any repairs that need undertaking. Whether you are looking for a
property that’s ready to be occupied or requires refurbishment, it is always
advisable to take a professional to view the property with you, to advice on any
unforeseen costs that you have not taken into account. To gain maximum return on
your investment, make sure you utilise all available room options i.e. if there
are 2 reception rooms, is it feasible to convert 1 into another bedroom.

Mortgage provider
-----------------
Unless you have the money upfront you’ll have to see if a mortgage provider can
supply you with a buy to let mortgage, remember to shop around for the best
deal. Buy to let mortgage lenders normally want a 15% deposit and the rent to
cover 125% of the mortgage repayments.

Do your sums
------------
Before buying a property remember to do your sums and work out the price of the
property against rental income.

For example:

If you were looking at buying a 3 bedroom property with 2 reception rooms for
£140k, let’s see what income you would get back if you rented all 3 bedrooms
over 10 years at £70 per room/week:

£70 per room/week x 3 rooms x 52 weeks x 10 years = £109,200 /£10,920 per
annum/£910 per month.

And if you were to convert a 2nd reception room this would generate a further
£303 per month.

Now look at your mortgage repayments, council tax, bills and maintenance etc.
Can you stay on top of the repayments, also taking into consideration the
minimum number of weeks tenancy per annum you need to attain to achieve the
required return.
