3 tips to prevent scams and keeping you safe online
===================================================

**Rental scams** are increasingly common. We put a lot of effort in keeping this
site safe. This includes [address verification on payment](/help/plus-membership),
hand checking adverts as they go live. We have a monitored internal email system
meaning we never reveal your email address. This helps to keep at bay spam and
prevent scams.



Below we have put together a list of known scams for you to be aware of:


1. Western Union scams
----------------------


**If a stranger asks you to use Western Union in their email, it is a scam.** We
are not aware of any case where landlord or tenant asked for a Western Union
payment and this wasn’t a scam.


Western Union and MoneyGram transactions are intended only for transactions
between yourself and people you know and trust. The transaction details should
never be disclosed to a third party.


Please report this immediately using the form at the bottom of this page along
with the email address or URL of the ad.


2. Fake cheque or bankers draft
-------------------------------


**Scammer sends you a fake cheque for too much money for the deposit on your
room and asks you to refund the difference via bank transfer.**


This is normally where a scammer will send you an e-mail and ask you questions
about your room, they will then reveal their interest, but come up with a reason
why they cannot see the room (usually because they are abroad at the moment),
they will then ask you for your details and send you a fake cheque or asks you
to draw money from a stolen card if you are a B&B or hotel.


When you get the cheque you will notice it will be for more than the amount you
asked for, the scammer will normally contact you soon after you received the
cheque to say they have made a mistake with the amount, and needs the overpaid
money back ASAP and will ask you to send the overpaid money back by Cash,
Cheque, Bankers Draft or Western Union.


Never do this, **when receiving any money always wait for it to clear**. This
full process can take up to 3 weeks and always check with the bank if in doubt.
Read about [another version of this scam](/p39).


3. Fake ads
-----------


Scammers like to place really attractive room rental ads in great areas with
really nice looking pictures at great monthly prices. When calling or e-mailing
these adverts, they will get you really interested and say there is massive
demand for the property, but there not available to do viewing this week then
offer you to secure it for £100 by cheque, bank transfer or Western Union. They
will send you the date you can move in. When you then come to move in you’ll
find the pictures are fake, the property may not even exist and if it does the
Thompson family are wondering what you’re doing at their property. Rule of
thumb: if it looks too good to be true, it probably is.


Typical scam emails
-------------------




---


Hi,


Thanks for the reply and the sincere interest you have in my flat. I have
decided to rent out my flat to you as long as you’ll take good care of my flat
as how it is. However, it is unfortunate that my **past bitter experience of
inviting people to come and view** or reserve my flat without any form of
confirmation of their financial ability and not keeping up to time as at when
scheduled, has brought about great loss to me. I have travelled all the way from
Ireland to take some interested candidates round my flat because that’s where I
work with M. Gould (Scunthorpe) Ltd.


Some outside tenants do not have the money to pay the rent and yet they disturb
the landlord to arrange a viewing with their friend or relative who are in
Reading, also some do not meet up with the appointments which has led to the
dismissal of some landlords in office by their employers.


Henceforth, **my lawyer** and I have decided to carry out a **simple test on
financial ability** to pay for my rent before coming for viewing. I would not
ask you to send your bank statement. At least 1 month rent and security deposit
which is £ 400 which is refundable after your 1 month stay in my flat would be
required from you to transfer through **Western union** money transfer agent.
You can make the transfer with your name as a sender name and your partner or
friend in UK premises as a receiver.


Once you have done this, scan the receipt to me and if you do not have scanner,
you may write out the details on the receipt as I will send it to my lawyer to
verify if it’s truly genuine and available in your friend’s custody, after
verification, then we can proceed for the viewing and you can as well tell your
friend or partner to pick up the money and also, I will refund back to you the
cost of transfer when we meet.


I look forward to reading from you soon.


Regards     Mr/Mrs Colin




---


Hi Emma,


You will be sharing with a professional female from Ireland. She’s 24 y/o and
work in Finance.


Regarding the viewing, there’s no **problem in inviting you for the viewing**, I
currently work and live in Manchester so I will need to take a day off from work
in order to come down to arrange the viewing with you.It is unfortunate that my
**past bitter experience of inviting people to come and view** my flat without
any form of confirmation of their financial ability and not keeping up to time
as at when scheduled, has brought about great loss to me, is either they cannot
afford the rent or the security deposit required but want me to come down with
the aim of renegotiating.


I have **consulted my lawyer** and we have resolved that any potential tenants
should be able to prove in the following way in order to determine who is
financially buoyant and that he or she can stick to appointment when scheduled
and able to pay his/her rent as at when due. In this case, a bank-statement or
guarantee from your organization wont be accepted as we have had wayward tenants
tendering fake documents.


PROCEDURE:


1) Transfer the amount £950 (1 month rent and security deposit) to any of your
family members or your friend via **Western Union** at the nearest Western Union
outlet/shop close to you. You can ask any of them to make the transfer to you
either.


Your Name (as Sender) to any of your family members or your friend (as Receiver)
in London or any of them make you the receiver.


2) Scan & Send a copy of the Western Union transaction receipt as a proof of the
transaction or mail me the transaction details. (The money is safe as it is only
you that can withdraw since you need a ID card or International passport)


3) Then, we will meet for viewing.


4) If you decide to take the flat, we will go to any local Western Union outlet
close to the flat for you to pick up the money and pay me. (You don’t need to
come with cash to view, after viewing we will go together, you will cancel the
transfer and withdraw the money to pay me).


5) Keys will be handed over to you after signing the contracts.


I do not want you to have the feeling that **I am asking for money BEFORE you
see what you are renting** because I know that payment is meant to be done AFTER
you have seen the Flat and okay with it that is why I said you should make the
transfer to yourself so that you will be the one to receive the money and pay me
in person after the viewing.


If you are ready ,you can go ahead and make the transfer and let me know
immediately you do the transfer so that I can know how to squeeze out time to
come and meet you.You will need to scan the copy of the transfer receipt and
email it to me to confirm it online in order to know you have made the transfer
and to let you know that I will return back to you the full transfer charges
whether you decide to rent the flat or not when we meet.


Let me know if you are ok with this arrangement so that we can proceed.


Kind regards,     Alice.

