Landlords Get a Better Rep
==========================

![Landlord Rising Damp](/media/images/rising-damp.jpg)


Since the recession it seems that the traditional impression we have of
Landlords has improved, Landlord Assistis has claims that stereotypes of the
buy-to-let landlord has improved because of the Credit Crunch.


As property prices reached their peak in 2006/2007 perception of
[landlords](/advice) was typical of the 70's sit com Rising Damp where the
landlord Rupert Rigsby is greedy and miserly and a bit of a creep. When the
property market was booming UK landlords were often accused of this stereotype,
accused of setting high rents and not paying for repairs or maintenance to their
properties.


Since the recession a lot of people have been forced into sub standard [rental
accommodation](/), but it isn't just tenants that have been hit, Landlords have
been stuck with high mortgage payments and tougher legislation but Landlord
Assist believe that Landlords have earned and been given a much better
reputation.


He said: "The credit crunch has forced more and more people to turn to rented
accommodation over the last 18 months. This has helped to remove bad landlords
from the UK rental market and made those remaining much more socially aware,
with affordable accommodation and high quality customer service becoming a
priority."


Institutional investors have also introduced high quality rental accommodation
to the market and enforced others to provide better quality accommodation in
order to compete.


"It's good to see UK Landlords are getting a fairer rep, I have been in plenty
of rented accommodation but only ever had good landlords, I've never had to put
up with the Rigsbys of this world."

