The Rent A Room Scheme
======================

Renting a room has always had benefits but now people who rent rooms out can get
an added bonus of being tax exempt up to a certain amount.


The **Rent a Room** scheme allows people who take in a lodger to get up to
£7,500 in rent without having to pay tax. The new scheme means landlords and
tenants can take in a tax-free ‘gross’ income (before expenses) from renting
their furnished accommodation.


In a time when everyone seems to be paying taxes for everything, it is a nice
change to see the Inland Revenue giving something back. Many people have had to
take lodgers in flat shares and house shares to help pay the bills and mortgages
so being exempt from a lot of this income will be a nice relief.


Anyone can opt into the **Rent a Room** scheme, even if you don’t own your own
home (although I would recommend getting your landlords permission), as long as
the accommodation you are letting is your main living area for most of the time.
It can’t be a holiday home or a buy to let property, and your lodger must be
paying you to live there.


As usual though, there are some exclusions, the **Rent A Room** totals £7,500 a
year for a homeowner, this total is the same for joint home owners meaning
individually the relief is half at £3,750. It also only applies to furnished
accommodation’s, and if the rent you receive goes above the £7,500 then you
still have to pay tax above this threshold.


The **Rent a Room** scheme only applies when a lodger occupies a room or floor
of your house, but not if you have converted your house into separate flats. If
this is the case you will have to declare any income from renting these rooms
tothe HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) and pay tax in the normal way.


Full up to date details
on <https://www.gov.uk/rent-room-in-your-home/the-rent-a-room-scheme>

