Speed flatmating
================

![Speed flatmating](https://i.ibb.co/ZJnHFZK/speedflatmating.jpg)

I've heard of Speed dating before, but recently I've come across the new
phenomenon of speed flatmating. Landlords, flatmates, and tenants meet together
at an event to spend a few minutes interviewing each other to see if they can
live together.

This speed interviewing process enables flatmates to ask questions they feel is
important when finding someone to move in, landlords also get to meet potential
tenants and judge them in a few minutes.

I think speed flatmating is quite a good idea as it gets people with the same
goal of renting or providing accommodation all in the same room, but I'm not
sure what questions you would ask, and I don't think 3 minutes is enough time to
judge a persons' character.

However, most speed flatmating events will split you into certain groups of
areas, so you don't waste time speaking to flatmates who live out of the area you
are looking for. You get a good first impression and although you can't tell
everything from them, you can get a good feel of whether you're going to get on.
Sharing a house mate does not mean you are going to be best mates, although can
happen, so don't go into it with too high expectations. Look for someone who
asks decent questions, has a personality you can get on with and gives good
answers to your questions.

I have never been speed flatmating before but will be trying it soon (so I'll
let you know how I get on) but I've been thinking about what questions to ask.
I'm not sure if asking hygiene questions is appropriate and probably wouldn't
give off a good impression but it's a valid question when moving in together.
I'll probably stick to hobbies and interests and hope to meet someone that will
join me to watch match of the day.
