Austerity: The History of a Dangerous Idea
==========================================
The reasons given for why we all have to be austere (we have spent too much,
etc.) and the logics expounded for the supposed positive effects of austerity as
a policy—that cuts lead to growth—are, as we shall see, by and large dangerous
nonsense.


Part of the reason for this is, as we shall see, ideological.


Cutting the welfare state in the name of producing more growth and opportunity
is an offensive canard. The purpose of this book is to make us all remember that
and thereby help to ensure that the future does not belong only to the already
privileged few.


Austerity is a form of voluntary deflation in which the economy adjusts through
the reduction of wages, prices, and public spending to restore competitiveness,
which is (supposedly) best achieved by cutting the state’s budget, debts, and
deficits.


Austerity clearly is not working if “not working” means reducing the debt and
promoting growth.


Having already bailed out the banks, we have to make sure that there is room on
the public balance sheet to backstop them. That’s why we have austerity. It’s
still all about saving the banks.


Austerity is not just the price of saving the banks. It’s the price that the
banks want someone else to pay.


Austerity is a zombie economic idea because it has been disproven time and
again, but it just keeps coming.


Partly because it enables conservatives to try (once again) to run the detested
welfare state out of town, it never seems to die.


We have turned the politics of debt into a morality play, one that has shifted
the blame from the banks to the state. Austerity is the penance—the virtuous
pain after the immoral party—except it is not going to be a diet of pain that we
shall all share. Few of us were invited to the party, but we are all being asked
to pay the bill.


Austerity is first and foremost a political problem of distribution, and not an
economic problem of accountancy.


Despite what Mrs. Thatcher reportedly once said, not only is there something
called society, we all live in it, rich and poor alike, for better and for
worse.


Austerity is not a well worked-out body of ideas and doctrine, an integral part
of economic, or any other, theory. Rather, it is derivative of a wider set of
beliefs about the appropriate role of the state in the economy that lie
scattered around classical and contemporary economic theory.


Austerity doesn’t work but the fact that we are still being told that it does
shows us one thing: facts never disconfirm a good ideology, which is why
austerity remains a very dangerous idea.


The crisis was generated by the private sector but is being paid for by the
public sector, that is, by you and me.


If all the trouble was generated in the private sector, why do so many people
blame the state for the crisis and see cuts to state spending as the way out of
a private-sector mess?


Part of the reason no one saw the crisis coming lay within the very models that
the banks used to see things coming. Such models see the future only as a
normally distributed replication of the past. This makes big, random,
game-changing events impossible to foresee, when in fact they are all too
common.


Note once again how none of this has anything to do with the state’s spending
habits or individual morality. The causes are once again systemic and arise out
of the interaction of the parts to produce an outcome that is irreducible to
them.


We need to address the deepest cause of the crisis—the other reason no one saw
it coming: the theories of a generation of economic thinkers who only ever saw
markets as good and the state as bad, which takes us back to economics as a
morality tale, albeit of a different type. [\*](#ASIN:B00BJK4Y7U;LOC:715)


The way we think about financial markets today is a consequence of the
revolution in macroeconomic theory that occurred in the 1970s, when the old way
of thinking about the world, Keynesian macroeconomics, was seen, by the
standards of the day, to fail a critical real-world test.


In short, the world was seen to be at variance with the instruction sheet, so
the instruction sheet had to be rewritten.


The new instruction sheet, which came to be known as “neoclassical,” or more
popularly, “neoliberal” economics, was quite technical, but basically it started
from the premise that individuals were not the shortsighted, animal-sprit,
driven businessmen lampooned by Keynes, but were instead supersmart processors
of information.


Consequently, government can’t do much at all except screw things up by getting
in the way. Left alone with common and accurate information, such individuals’
expectations about possible future states of the economy will converge and
promote a stable and self-enforcing equilibrium.


These ideas, formalized as the efficient markets hypothesis (EMH) and the
rational expectations hypothesis (RATEX), are just as important politically as
they are theoretically, they hold that free and integrated markets are not
merely a good way to organize financial markets, they are the only way.


To the extent that the state has a role, it devolves to “doing nothing” since
doing something will only produce price distortions that will upset market
efficiency.


If you think markets work this way, the very notion of regulating finance
becomes nonsense.


If you think markets work this way, then it follows that risk is calculable,
sliceable, tradable, and best held by rational investors who know what they are
buying.


There is no public sector, only the private sector, and it is always in
equilibrium.


The flaw in the logic was once again the expectation that the whole cannot be
different from its component parts.


But it turned out that the whole was quite different from the sum of its parts
because the interaction of the parts produced outcomes miles away from the
expectations of the instruction sheet, a sheet that was quite wrong about the
world in the first place.


The crisis, then, was, much more than the stagflation that discredited
Keynesianism, a crisis of ideas. It was a crisis of the instruction sheet of the
past thirty years.


The rational expectations of sophisticated investors turned out to be
shortsighted and bubble chasing, as irrational exuberance on the upside gave way
to runaway pessimism on the downside, just as Keynes had warned about eighty
years ago.


But most of all, what we couldn’t see coming was something that the instruction
sheet said was irrelevant, a form of risk that wasn’t reducible to the sum of
individual risks: systemic risk.


Systemic risk, the risk that cannot be foreseen, is what the different elements
discussed here combined to produce. Systemic risk blew the efficient market
down.


Smith’s invisible hand had just given the public the finger.


Not to put too fine a point on it, these ideas cost, once lost output is
included, as much as $13 trillion and, on average, a 40 percent to 50 percent
increase in the debt of the states hit by the crisis.


That seems to be a very large price to pay to save something that was too big to
fail and that wasn’t meant to fail in the first place, especially when you and I
are expected to pay for it.


\*\*\*


To put it bluntly, the state plugged a gap and stopped a financial collapse. It
did not dig a fiscal ditch through profligate spending.


Any narrative that locates wasteful spending by governments prior to the crisis
in 2007 as the cause of the crisis is more than just simply wrong; it is
disingenuous and partisan.


What happened was that banks promised growth, delivered losses, passed the cost
on to the state, and then the state got the blame for generating the debt, and
the crisis, in the first place.


The banks may have made the losses, but the citizenry will pay for them. This is
a pattern we see repeatedly in the crisis.


Austerity is a great policy for the banks because the people who are to pay for
the mess are not the same ones who made it. Nowhere is this truer than in
Europe.


Just as we saw in the US case, the crisis in Europe has almost nothing to do
with states and everything to do with markets. It is a private-sector crisis
that has once again become a state responsibility.


Why, then, keep up the fiction that the bond market crisis is a crisis of
spendthrift governments?


Cut spending, raise taxes—but cut spending more than you raise taxes—and all
will be well, the story went.


Just to keep things on track, democratically elected governments in Greece and
Italy were deposed and replaced by unelected technocrats who promised to keep
the reforms going.


George Osborne, Britain’s new Conservative chancellor of the exchequer, made
repeated comparisons to the fiscal situation of Greece and the United Kingdom as
soon as he was elected.


Austerity’s moment in the sun had arrived courtesy of the Greeks.


Cause and correlation were confused, quite deliberately, on a massive scale.


What were essentially private-sector debt problems were rechristened as “the
Debt” generated by “out-of-control” public spending.
[\*](#ASIN:B00BJK4Y7U;LOC:1313)


Private-sector weaknesses ended up creating public-sector liabilities that
European publics now have to pay for with austerity programs that make the
situation worse rather than better.


Banking bubbles and busts cause sovereign debt crises. Period.


The European monetary project was a bit mad from the get-go. It has only
recently revealed itself to be an exercise in insanity.


Why, then, do European governments blame it all on sovereigns that have spent
too much? Basically, it’s because in a democracy you can hardly come clean about
what you are doing and expect to survive.


Imagine a major European politician trying to explain why a quarter of Spain
needs to be unemployed, and why the whole of periphery Europe needs to sit in a
permanent recession just to save a currency that has only existed for a decade.


Given what is at stake, we must wonder whether anyone ever really thought that
austerity was a good idea, whether it was ever anything more than political
cover for selfish interests.


Two answers present themselves. The first is a variant of the line popularized
by Mrs. Thatcher—“there is no alternative” (TINA).


That is indeed how European policy elites see things, hence austerity.


Europe is at the moment undertaking a giant austerity experiment and the
results, as discussed, are predictably awful.


Within the Eurozone, surplus countries have no problem running a permanent trade
surplus but criticize others for running deficits, as if you can have one
without the other.


\*\*\*


Britain’s New Liberalism came into being when British Liberal Party elites
essentially sided with Mill over Ricardo.


In short, if the primacy of private initiative and of liberal market
institutions were to be maintained, then the poverty and inequality Ricardo
regarded as natural and inevitable could no longer be tolerated.


The long-term consequences of this transformation of British Liberalism were
dramatic. Universal pensions, unemployment insurance, and the intensification of
industrial regulation all followed in the early twentieth century. Twenty years
later, the heirs to this movement were the great social and economic reformers
of the 1930s and 1940s, such as T. H. Marshall, John Maynard Keynes, and William
Beveridge. They in turn pushed the New Liberalism still further, laying the
foundations for a comprehensive welfare state.


The Austrian economists believed that liberalism was best defended, not through
more redistribution and state management, but through the complete withdrawal of
the state from its role in the economy. To borrow a term that is commonplace
today, the Austrians were [\*](#ASIN:B00BJK4Y7U;LOC:2014) the original “neo”
liberals.


Austrian economists never shed their fear of the Leviathan state, which they
continued to see as the ultimate enemy of liberal values.


In sum, while the New Liberals and their mid-twentieth-century heirs embraced
the state and intervention, the Austrians, in particular, Friedrich Hayek,
Ludwig von Mises, and Joseph Schumpeter, rejected these notions entirely.


The midcentury heirs of New Liberalism and the Austrian School still define the
basic terms of the austerity debate eighty years later.


If these ideas sound familiar today, it’s because, like the ideas of Hume and
Smith, the same arguments are being recycled again, eighty years later.


The need for “the return of business confidence” to start the recovery forms the
centerpiece of contemporary British austerity policy, despite its yielding zero
results to date.


Despite the expansion of the British state into the realm of pensions and
insurance and regulation under the influence of New Liberal ideas in the first
two decades of the twentieth century, the British response to the crisis of the
1920s and 1930s remained resolutely liberal and austere.


By the mid-1920s, however, as the postwar slump had turned into a full-blown
depression, and as these doctrines increasingly came under attack for worsening
the situation, the Treasury view began to take form as a defense of the status
quo.


As Conservative chancellor of the exchequer Stanley Baldwin put it in 1922,
“Money taken for government purposes is money taken away from trade, and
borrowing will thus tend to depress trade and increase unemployment.”


The British elite’s rather monolithic view began to splinter in 1925 when Keynes
criticized Churchill’s decision to go back on the gold standard after an
eleven-year hiatus.


This conflict between Keynes and the Treasury was exacerbated in 1929 when
Keynes, with Hubert Henderson, produced the pamphlet “Can Lloyd George Do It?”


This view was extremely threatening to the Treasury since it implied that
supply-side factors were insufficient to drive the economy to full employment.


But the Treasury wasn’t just fighting Keynes and Lloyd George. It was also
pandering to orthodox business opinion.


British austerity thinking, like its American cousin, proved remarkably immune
to the economic facts of the day. It may have admitted the necessity of the
state, but like Smith, it was in no mood to pay for the state’s actions.



Britain held on to austerity, and the Depression persisted until the start of
World War II.


During the 1940s, in the context of massive wartime spending, pro-spending,
anti-austerity ideas rose to prominence and pro-austerity doctrines faded into
the background.


The most famous anti-austerity argument was Keynes’s General Theory.


Keynes showed that consumption via workers’ paychecks ultimately drove
investment. Today we call this demand-side economics.


Not only is Smith’s world overturned, austerity as a sentiment, as a morality,
and as policy is overturned with it.


By 1946, the world had gone Keynes’s way.


With the Keynesian view ascendant, conservatives had a choice: admit that they
were wrong or find something else to talk about.


Anti-austerity it seemed, had won the day. But the victory was not complete.
Austerity survived in one part of the world immune to Lord Keynes: the
German-speaking world. Austrian school economists continued to give austerity a
globalized intellectual home.


Why then did Germany become the refuge for austerity arguments during the long
winter of the Keynesian era and the basic design template for the contemporary
European variant of austerity.


In sum, postwar Germany prospered with austerity-focused ideas of a particular
type at its core. Germany both possesses and professes a liberalism that
embraces the state and transforms it. In doing so, it does the same for
austerity.


Ordoliberalism may have modernized liberalism, but its economics in many ways
remain as classical as Smith and Hume.


It rather spectacularly ignores the fact that for someone to be running an
export surplus, someone else must be running a deficit. We cannot all run
surpluses and save. Someone has to spend so that there is demand for these
exports.


Germany’s focus on rules, obligations, a strong monetary authority, a weak
parliament, and no spending to compensate for busts sounds familiar, it should.
It’s the basic design of the EU. Germany’s response to the crisis, and the
crisis itself, both spring from the same ordoliberal instruction sheet.


From the Maastricht convergence criteria to the Stability and Growth Pact to the
proposed new fiscal treaty—it’s all about the economic constitution—the rules,
the ordo. We must have rules and an independent monetary authority to ensure
that states conform to the ordo imperative; hence, the ECB.


In the case of Greece and Italy in 2011, if that meant deposing a few
democratically elected governments, then so be it.


All of which brings us to the role played by ordoliberal’s cousins, the Austrian
economists, in pushing austerity arguments forward.


Although battered and beaten-down by the Keynesian revolution after World War
II, Austrian ideas never quite disappeared from the American scene. They staged
something of a comeback in the 1970s when Hayek was awarded the Nobel Prize in
economics and served as a popular justification for Reagan’s supply-side
policies.


The Austrian policy proposal that follows from this analysis—“maximum austerity
as quickly as possible”—makes little sense given what we know about how actual
economies perform when they go through busts.


Far from encouraging “self-healing,” nonintervention and noncompensation can
produce the politics of permanent austerity, as Europe is finding out.


Politically attractive to some, especially to antistatist conservatives, such
ideas resonate in theory, but they detonate in practice.


It is the rise of these neoliberal ideas that enabled the return of austerity as
the commonsense thing to do in a slump.


\*\*\*


Monetarism is a set of ideas developed in the 1960s and 1970s, most notably by
Milton Friedman in the United States and by Patrick Minford in the United
Kingdom.


Friedman assumed that unemployment was voluntary and was not due to a deficiency
of demand. People choose labor or leisure at the prevailing wage.


In other words, the 25 percent of Spaniards who are presently without work
simply don’t want to work at the prevailing wage and are on vacation.


By giving us a new set of reasons why state intervention to compensate economic
downturns can only end up producing inflation, monetarism helped naturalize
Austrian and ordoliberal ideas, pulling them off the fringe and into mainstream
acceptance.


What must be done to save the liberal economy from the destructive forces of
democracy? Banning democracy would be effective but might be unpopular.
[\*](#ASIN:B00BJK4Y7U;LOC:2706)


A second-best solution would be to have an institution that would effectively
override such decision making. Luckily, such an institution already existed
thanks to those ordoliberals, or neoliberals would have had to invent one: the
independent central bank.


During the Keynesian era, central banks almost everywhere were the financing
agent for the national treasury: they cut the checks that the politicians said
needed to be cut. hat, according to neoliberals, was exactly the problem.


Kydland and Prescott argued that the key to solving this problem was for the
central bank to be made independent from politicians.


As a consequence, policy making should be delegated away from democratically
elected politicians to independent conservative central bankers.


The fact that these theories rest upon incredibly narrow operational premises
and have scant evidence going for them is beside the point.


These “neo” neoliberal ideas revolutionized economic policy making in the
developed world in the 1970s and 1980s. By the 1990s central bank independence,
for example, had spread like a rash over the face of the planet, most notably
throughout all of Europe [\*](#ASIN:B00BJK4Y7U;LOC:2642)


When the ECB was unleashed on Europe in 1999, it was arguably the most
independent central bank around, charged with only one goal: fight inflation,
even in the middle of a deflation.


The problem is that what economists call moral hazard is what normal people call
trust.


The EU’s political project was built on trust, not the elimination of moral
hazard. That’s why it worked. Its monetary project is based on opposite
principles.



The question of how the presumed preference for low inflation over all other
goals becomes the preference of all society, especially when those enforcing
that preference as policy don’t want to ask the voters, remains conspicuous by
its absence.


Once the United States shut down gold convertibility in 1971, the world’s major
currencies began to float against each other. The IMF, literally, had nothing to
do.


But large bureaucratic entities do not cease to exist the moment their mission
is either accomplished or disappears.


The IMF became the financial police force behind the implementation of what were
termed “structural adjustment programs”…“codified in John Williamson’s
well-known Washington Consensus”… and the results were, by and large, terrible.


The IMF’s sister institution the World Bank produced a report in 2005 that
pretty much acknowledged the near total failure of the Washington Consensus
checklist of reforms.


All of which brings us finally to the modern “Austerians” and their theory of
expansionary fiscal contraction, the zenith of modern austerity thinking.


In such a world, the slump is the perfect place to cut while spending is always
and everywhere the wrong policy.


As such, the welfare state has to go because “it is very difficult if not
impossible to fix public finances when in trouble without solving the question
of automatic increases in entitlements.”


This, then, is the essence of modern austerity thinking. The only remaining
question we need to ask is, does it work? The answer, The only remaining
question we need to ask is, does it work? The answer, is certainly not in the
big cases of the past in the 1920s and 1930s, not at all in Europe at the
moment, and only very occasionally and under very specialized conditions
elsewhere.


Deploying austerity has helped propel Spain and Greece to the brink of economic
and political collapse and impoverished millions of people throughout the rest
of Southern Europe.


What we learned in the 1930s has been forgotten. That forgetting is perhaps the
strongest reason why austerity remains such a dangerous idea.


If austerity’s intellectual history has been relatively short its natural
history has been even shorter. It’s not until the early twentieth century that
we encounter states that are both big enough to cut, and democratic enough to
cause problems for austerity policy.


Austerity was tried, and tried again and it simply didn’t work.


\*\*\*


Today, many seemingly sensible people seem to think that the solution to any and
all economic problems lies in returning to something called the gold standard.


I can only assume that the folks peddling the return of gold as a good idea are
ignorant of the actual history of the gold standard.


You can only really run a system like this, where domestic wages and prices do
most the adjusting to external prices, if you are not a democracy.


It created conditions where the domestic monetary authorities, to maintain that
all important gold cover, would pursue austerity policies to shrink deficits,
keep gold at home, and defend the currency.


It was hardly surprising, then, that it was under the gold standard that labor
across the world, both industrial and agricultural, started to join together in
unions, political parties, and social movements to demand protection from the
policies of their own governments.


The basic problem of running a gold standard and the Eurozone are one and the
same.


There are (mainly) four ways to get out of a financial crisis—inflate, deflate,
devalue, and default.


In both the gold standard and the Eurozone, states can neither inflate nor
devalue. That leaves default—which you want to avoid—and deflation (austerity)
as the only remaining way to adjust in both cases.


Unfortunately, once politicians had to answer through the ballot box to the mass
publics that bear the costs of this adjustment, the credibility of the claim
that “no amount of austerity was too much” became less believable, and less
supportable.


Repeated attempts to get back on gold and stay on it in round after round of
austerity in the 1920s made the already unbearable simply impossible, and the
system fell apart in the early 1930s.


Austerity simply doesn’t work, no matter how many times you do it. Eventually it
will fall apart because there are only so many rounds of austerity people will
vote for before the system breaks down.


The parallel to the Eurozone as a gold standard without gold (you can’t devalue,
inflate, or default there either) is both obvious and vitally important.


The Roaring Twenties began with a bump in Europe but not the United States,
precisely because the Americans were not on gold.


Austerity not only didn’t work in Japan. It created the worst depression in
Japanese history, provoked an assassination campaign against bankers, and
empowered “the wonderful folks that brought you Pearl Harbor.”


Now, if you think this enough to demonstrate why austerity is a dangerous idea,
see what happened in France around the same time.


The Bank of France continually vetoed budget increases that would have allowed
the French military to modernize, and even mobilize, to meet the German threat.


By 1936 Hitler knew one thing. The franc would be defended at all costs. As for
France, that was another matter entirely.


The interwar period taught us some valuable lessons about why austerity does not
work and why its application is a dangerous idea. Building an entire
international monetary order with an inherent deflationary bias that can’t work
in a democracy is bad idea.


Repeated rounds of austerity in country after country was madness.


It made the depression deeper, longer, and, arguably, laid the foundations for
the war that would engulf the world in the 1940s.


Austerity didn’t just fail—it helped blow up the world. That’s the definition of
a very dangerous idea.


\*\*\* But even if the IMF has lost faith in austerity, it does not mean that
its champions will not try to find other examples where it has supposedly
worked. Too many reputations and too much sunk political capital are at stake
for mere facts to get in the way of this ideology.


Austerity remains an ideology immune to facts and basic empirical refutation.
This is why it remains, despite any and all evidence we can muster against it, a
very dangerous idea.


This book has examined the case for austerity as both a sensible economic policy
and as a coherent set of economic ideas, and it has found austerity to be
lacking in both respects. Austerity doesn’t work. Period.


It has instead brought us class politics, riots, political instability, more
rather than less debt, assassinations, and war. It has never once “done what it
says on the tin.”


Austerity has been applied with exceptional vigor during the ongoing European
financial crisis. The costs of this epistemic arrogance and ideological
insistence have been, and continue to be, horrendous.


The joke doing the rounds at the beginning of the crisis, before Ireland blew
up, was, what’s the difference between Iceland and Ireland? The answer was, one
letter and six months. The joke, it turned out, was a prophecy.
[\*](#ASIN:B00BJK4Y7U;LOC:4067)


A comparison of the two is as close to a natural experiment of the effects of
austerity and bailouts as you are likely to find.


In terms of growth Iceland has fared better than anyone would have dared hope.
Unlike Ireland, employment growth in Iceland has been strong.


Iceland had ten times the bust of the United States’ worst-case-ever scenario,
and it not only survived, it prospered.


Iceland not only survived letting its banks go bust, it became a healthier and
more equal society in doing so.


When you do the exact opposite of the austerity playbook, you not only survive,
you prosper.


Tax economists on both sides of the Atlantic are beginning to argue that higher
taxes on top earners can pay for debt reduction. Apparently, there is no need
for austerity, after all.


Austerity has been tried and will keep being tried, at least in the Eurozone,
until it’s either abandoned or voted out. It doesn’t work.


Given that forgiveness is unlikely, and the other options, inflation and
default, are even worse, it is pretty much inevitable that higher taxes on top
earners will become a part of the landscape.


This is how we are going to deal with our debts—through taxes and not through
austerity. Not because austerity is unfair, which it is, not because there are
more debtors than creditors, which there are, and not because democracy has an
inflationary bias, which it doesn’t, but because austerity simply doesn’t work.

