Because We Say So
=================

By **Noam Chomsky**

![](/bookimg/becausewesayso.jpg)

Higher education is under attack not because it is failing, but because it is a
potentially democratic public sphere. As such, conservatives and neoliberals
often see it as a dangerous institution that reminds them of the rebellious
legacy of the 1960s, when universities were the center of struggles over free
speech, anti-racist and feminist pedagogies, and the anti-war movement.
[\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:179)


As Chomsky reminds us, caring about other people is a dangerous idea in America
today and signals the ongoing drift of the United States from a struggling
democracy to an increasingly consolidated authoritarian state.


We live at a time when the growing catastrophes that face Americans and the rest
of the globe are increasingly matched by the accumulation of power by the rich
and financial elite. Their fear of democracy is now strengthened by the
financial, political and corporate elite’s intensive efforts to normalize their
own power and silence those who hold them accountable.


In 2009 the energy industries, backed by business lobbies, launched major
campaigns that cast doubt on the near-unanimous consensus of scientists on the
severity of the threat of human-induced global warming.


One effect is that scarcely one-third of the U.S. population believes that there
is a scientific consensus on the threat of global warming—far less than the
global average, and radically inconsistent with the facts.


The IEA estimated that if the world continues on its present course, the “carbon
budget” will be exhausted by 2017.


FINANCIAL TIMES devoted a full page to the optimistic expectations that the U.S.
might become energy-independent for a century with new technology for extracting
North American fossil fuels.The FINANCIAL TIMES said nothing about what kind of
a world would emerge from these exciting prospects.


Energy is to burn; the global environment be damned.


Right now we are failing to commemorate an event of great human significance:
the 50th anniversary of President Kennedy’s decision to launch the direct
invasion of South Vietnam, soon to become the most extreme crime of aggression
since World War II.


Official efforts at justifying the attacks were slim, and mostly fantasy.


A further step in undermining the principles of the Magna Carta was taken when
President Obama signed the National Defense Authorization Act, which codifies
Bush-Obama practice of indefinite detention without trial under military
custody. Such treatment is now mandatory in the case of those accused of aiding
enemy forces during the “war on terror,”


Public education is under attack around the world, and in response, student
protests have recently been held in Britain, Canada, Chile, Taiwan and
elsewhere.


Ralph Waldo Emerson observed that political leaders call for popular education
because they fear that “This country is filling up with thousands and millions
of voters, and you must educate them to keep them from our throats.” But
educated the right way: Limit their perspectives and understanding, discourage
free and independent thought, and train them for obedience.


The Trilateral Commission issued stern warnings in 1975 that there is too much
democracy, in part due to the failures of the institutions responsible for “the
indoctrination of the young.”


Since then, many measures have been taken to restore discipline. One is the
crusade for privatization—placing control in reliable hands.


Tuition increases trap students into long-term debt and hence subordination to
private power. Another device is the corporatization of the universities. The
latter approach includes teaching to test and other mechanisms that destroy
students’ interest and seek to fit them into a mold, easily controlled.


“In the history of human rights, the worst atrocities are always committed by
somebody else, never us”—whoever “us” is.


From 1960 to “the Soviet collapse in 1990, the numbers of political prisoners,
torture victims, and executions of nonviolent political dissenters in Latin
America vastly exceeded those in the Soviet Union and its East European
satellites.”


“dissidents are heroic,” but they can be “irritants to American diplomats who
have important business to transact with countries that don’t share our values.”


It’s unnecessary to dwell on the extreme dangers posed by one central element of
the destruction of the commons: the reliance on fossil fuels, which courts
global disaster. Details may be debated, but there is little serious doubt that
the problems are all too real and that the longer we delay in addressing them,
the more awful will be the legacy left to generations to come.


After the ignominious collapse of the Copenhagen global climate change summit in
2009, Bolivia organized a People’s Summit with 35,000 participants from 140
countries. The summit called for very sharp reduction in emissions, and a
Universal Declaration on the Rights of Mother Earth. That is a key demand of
indigenous communities all over the world. The demand is ridiculed by
sophisticated Westerners, but unless we can acquire some of the sensibility of
the indigenous communities, they are likely to have the last laugh—a laugh of
grim despair.


There are two issues of overwhelming significance, because the fate of the
species is at stake: environmental disaster and nuclear war.


A new study from the Climate Vulnerability Monitor has found that “climate
change caused by global warming is slowing down world economic output by 1.6
percent a year and will lead to a doubling of costs in the next two decades.”


Unlike Iran, Israel refuses to allow inspections or to sign the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). It has hundreds of nuclear weapons and advanced
delivery systems, and a long record of violence, aggression and lawlessness,
thanks to unremitting American support.


It hardly takes more than a day in Gaza to appreciate what it must be like to
try to survive in the world’s largest open-air prison, where some 1.5 million
people on a roughly 140-square-mile strip of land are subject to random terror
and arbitrary punishment, with no purpose other than to humiliate and degrade.


Raji Sourani, the human-rights advocate, observes that “what has to be kept in
mind is that the occupation and the absolute closure is an ongoing attack on the
human dignity of the people in Gaza in particular and all Palestinians
generally. It is systematic degradation, humiliation, isolation and
fragmentation of the Palestinian people.”


A visitor to Gaza can’t help feeing disgust at the obscenity of the occupation,
compounded with guilt, because it is within our power to bring the suffering to
an end and allow the Samidin to enjoy the lives of peace and dignity they
deserve.


So if you’re, say, the CEO of Walmart or Dell or Hewlett-Packard, you’re
perfectly happy to have very cheap labor in China working under hideous
conditions and with few environmental constraints. As long as China has what’s
called economic growth, that’s fine.


Once we break out of the framework of national states as unified entities with
no internal divisions within them, we can see that there is a global shift of
power, but it’s from the global workforce to the owners of the world:
transnational capital, global financial institutions.


There have been serious debates over the years about whether capitalism is
compatible with democracy. If we keep to really existing capitalist democracy
the question is effectively answered: They are radically incompatible. It seems
to me unlikely that civilization can survive really existing capitalism and the
sharply attenuated democracy that goes along with it. But could functioning
democracy make a difference? [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1184)


Let’s keep to the most critical immediate problem that civilization faces:
environmental catastrophe.


The fact that the public is influenced by science is deeply troubling to those
who dominate the economy and state policy.


Within the system of really existing capitalist democracy it is of extreme
importance that we become the stupid nation, not misled by science and
rationality, in the interests of the short-term gains of the masters of the
economy and political system, and damn the consequences.
[\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1222)


These commitments are deeply rooted in the fundamentalist market doctrines that
are preached within really existing capitalist democracy, though observed in a
highly selective manner, so as to sustain a powerful state that serves wealth
and power.


In the future, historians (if there are any) will look back on this curious
spectacle taking shape in the early 21st century. For the first time in human
history, humans are facing the significant prospect of severe
[\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1231) calamity as a result of their actions—actions
that are battering our prospects of decent survival.


The countries with large and influential indigenous populations are well in the
lead in seeking to preserve the planet. The countries that have driven
indigenous populations to extinction or extreme marginalization are racing
toward destruction.


Throughout the world, indigenous societies are struggling to protect what they
sometimes call “the rights of nature,” while the civilized and sophisticated
scoff silliness.


This is all exactly the opposite of what rationality would predict—unless it is
the skewed form of reason that passes through the filter of really existing
capitalist democracy.


It is noteworthy that today the strongest support for Israel in the
international arena comes from the United States, Canada and Australia, the
so-called Anglosphere—settler-colonial societies based on extermination or
expulsion of indigenous populations in favor of a higher race, and where such
behavior is considered natural and praiseworthy. [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1271)


Surveying the terrible conflicts in the world, it’s clear that almost all are
the residue of imperial crimes and the borders that the great powers drew in
their own interests.


Some borders are eroding along with the cruel hatreds and conflicts they
symbolize and inspire. The most dramatic case is Europe.
[\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1451)


The Syrian civil war has reignited the Sunni-Shiite conflict that was one of the
most terrible consequences of the U.S.-U.K. invasion of Iraq
[\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1461) .


Who owns the global atmosphere being polluted by the heat-trapping gases that
have just passed an especially perilous threshold .


That the Earth now desperately needs defense from impending environmental
catastrophe is surely obvious to any rational and literate person.


Whatever the world may think, U.S. actions are legitimate because we say so. The
principle was enunciated by the eminent statesman Dean Acheson in 1962, when he
instructed the American Society of International Law that no legal issue arises
when the United States responds to a challenge to its “power, position, and
prestige.”


Humans are social beings, and the kind of creature that a person becomes depends
crucially on the social, cultural and institutional circumstances of his or her
life. We are therefore led to inquire into the social arrangements that are
conducive to people’s rights and welfare, and to fulfilling their just
aspirations—in brief, the common good.


These range from very general principles, such as the truism that we should
apply to ourselves the same standards we do to others (if not harsher ones), to
more specific doctrines, such as a [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1783) dedication to
promoting democracy and human rights, which is proclaimed almost universally,
even by the worst monsters .


A good place to start is with John Stuart Mill’s classic ON LIBERTY. Its
epigraph formulates “The grand, leading principle, towards which every argument
unfolded in these pages directly converges: the absolute and essential
importance of human development in its richest diversity.”


Adam Smith acknowledges the power of what he calls the “vile maxim of the
masters of mankind”: “All for ourselves, and nothing for other people.”


Classical liberalism shipwrecked on the shoals of capitalism, but its humanistic
commitments and aspirations didn’t die.


This broad tendency in human development seeks to identify structures of
hierarchy, authority and domination that constrain human development, and then
subject them to a very reasonable challenge: Justify yourself.


It should be noted that the American brand of libertarianism differs sharply
from the libertarian tradition, accepting and indeed advocating the
subordination of working people to the masters of the economy, and the
subjection of everyone to the restrictive discipline and destructive features of
markets.


In the Brazilian rural workers movement, they speak of “widening the floors of
the cage”


We can extend the image to think of the cage of state institutions as a
protection from the savage beasts roaming outside: the predatory,
state-supported capitalist institutions dedicated in principle to private gain,
power and domination, with community and people’s interest at most a footnote,
revered in rhetoric but dismissed in practice as a matter of principle and even
law.


About 70 percent of the population, at the lower end of the wealth/income scale,
has no influence on policy. The resulting system is not democracy but
plutocracy.


A system in which liberty is enjoyed by the few, and security in its fullest
sense is available only to the elite.


“power today resides in control of the means of production, exchange, publicity,
transportation and communication. Whoever owns them rules the life of the
country,” even if democratic forms remain. Until those institutions are in the
hands of the public, politics will remain “the shadow cast on society by big
business,”


The Founding Fathers of the United States were well aware of the hazards of
democracy.


“the Constitution was intrinsically an aristocratic document designed to check
the democratic tendencies of the period.” [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1850)


Jefferson distinguished between “aristocrats and democrats.” The aristocrats are
“those who fear and distrust the people, and wish to draw all powers from them
into the hands of the higher classes.” The democrats, in contrast, “identify
with the people, have confidence in them, cherish and consider them as the most
honest and safe, although not the most wise depository of the public interest.”
[\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1857)


Today the successors to Jefferson’s “aristocrats” might argue about who should
play the guiding role: technocratic and policy-oriented intellectuals, or
bankers and corporate executives.


A normal country would be concerned by how it is viewed in the world. Certainly
that would be true of a country committed to “a decent respect to the opinions
of mankind,” to quote the Founding Fathers. But the United States is far from a
normal country.


The ability to ignore unwanted facts is one of the prerogatives of unchallenged
power.


A current example is the laments about the escalating Sunni-Shiite conflict that
is tearing apart the Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Syria.


The prevailing theme of U.S. commentary is that this strife is the terrible
consequence of the withdrawal of American force from the region.


The opposite is more nearly correct. The roots of the conflict within Islam are
many and varied, but it cannot be seriously denied that the split was
significantly exacerbated by the American- and British-led invasion of Iraq. And
it cannot be too often repeated that aggression was defined at the Nuremberg
Trials as “the supreme international crime,” differing from others in that it
encompasses all the evil that follows, including the current catastrophe.


A leading principle of international relations theory is that the state’s
highest priority is to ensure security.


The proposition seems plausible, almost self-evident, until we look more closely
and ask: Security for whom? For the general population? For state power itself?


Security for state power is at the high extreme, as illustrated by the efforts
that states exert to protect themselves from the scrutiny of their own
populations. In an interview on German TV, Edward J. Snowden said that his
“breaking point” was “seeing Director of National Intelligence, James Clapper,
directly lie under oath to Congress” by denying the existence of a domestic
spying program conducted by the National Security Agency.


There is, of course, a sense in which security is threatened by public
awareness—namely, security of state power from exposure.


Often the attempt to maintain secrecy is motivated by the need to guarantee the
security of powerful domestic sectors. One persistent example is the mislabeled
“free trade agreements”—mislabeled because they radically violate free trade
principles and are substantially not about trade at all, but rather about
investor rights. These instruments are regularly negotiated in secret.


They aren’t secret from the hundreds of corporate lobbyists and lawyers who are
writing the detailed provisions, with an impact revealed by the few parts that
have reached the public [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:1963) with the U.S. Trade
Representative’s office “representing corporate interests,” not those of the
public, “The likelihood that what emerges from the coming talks will serve
ordinary Americans’ interests is low; the outlook for ordinary citizens in other
countries is even bleaker.”


In the case of nuclear weapons, at least we know in principle how to overcome
the threat of apocalypse: Eliminate them. But another dire peril casts its
shadow over any contemplation of the future—environmental disaster.


Today the United States is crowing about “100 years of energy independence” as
the country becomes “the Saudi Arabia of the next century”—very likely the final
century of human civilization if current policies persist.


The corporate sector is carrying out major propaganda campaigns to convince the
public that climate change, if happening at all, does not result from human
activity. [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:2060)


What are the prospects for survival then? They are not bright. But the
achievements of those who have struggled for centuries for greater freedom and
justice leave a legacy that can be taken up and carried forward—and must be, and
soon, if hopes for decent survival are to be sustained. And nothing can tell us
more eloquently what kind of creatures we [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:2063) are.


The received standard version is that the primary goal of policy is security and
defense against enemies. The doctrine at once suggests a few questions: Security
for whom, and defense against which enemies? The answers are highlighted
dramatically by the Snowden revelations. Policy must assure the security of
state authority and concentrations of domestic power and defend them from a
frightening enemy: the domestic population, which can become a great danger if
not controlled.


To defend state power and private economic power from the domestic enemy, those
two entities must be concealed—while in sharp contrast, the enemy must be fully
exposed to state authority. [\*](#ASIN:B00R3C1SQ8;LOC:2160)


Edward Snowden has become the most wanted criminal in the world for failing to
comprehend this essential maxim. In brief, there must be complete transparency
for the population, but none for the powers that must defend themselves from
this fearsome internal enemy.


It is therefore a mistake to remind readers daily of the Nuremberg judgment.
Aggression is no longer the “supreme international crime.” It cannot compare
with destruction of the lives of future generations to ensure bigger bonuses
tomorrow.


One index of human impact is the extinction of species, now estimated to be at
about the same rate as it was 65 million years ago when an asteroid hit the
Earth. That is the presumed cause for the ending of the age of the dinosaurs,
which opened the way for small mammals to proliferate, and ultimately modern
humans. Today, it is humans who are the asteroid, condemning much of life to
extinction. The IPCC report reaffirms that the “vast majority” of known fuel
reserves must be left in the ground to avert intolerable risks to future
generations. Meanwhile the major energy corporations make no secret of their
goal of exploiting these reserves and discovering new ones.

[amzn:B00R3C1SQ8]

