Between Debt and the Devil: Money, Credit, and Fixing Global Finance
====================================================================

By **Adair Turner**

On Saturday September 20, 2008, I became chairman of the UK Financial Services
Authority. We faced the biggest financial crisis in 80 years. Seven days before
I started, I had had no idea we were on the verge of disaster. Nor did almost
everyone in the central banks, regulators, or finance ministries, nor in
financial markets or major economics departments.

Financial system fragility alone cannot explain why the post-crisis Great
Recession was so deep and recovery has been so weak.

We need to ask why debt contracts exist, what benefits they bring, and what
risks they inevitably create. We need to question whether banks should exist at
all.

I now believe that banks should operate with leverage levels (the ratio of total
assets to equity) more like five than the twenty-five or higher that we allowed
before the crisis. And I argue that governments and central banks should
sometimes stimulate economies by printing money to finance increased fiscal
deficits.

I came to believe that the most fundamental problems of financial and economic
instability are created not by activities that we would quite happily see
disappear entirely, but by activities—such as lending money to someone to buy a
house—which in moderate amounts are clearly valuable, but on an excessive scale
can cause economic disaster. This book makes that argument.

The fact that we are now slowly recovering from a deep and long-lasting
recession must not blind us to the reality that the 2007–2008 crash was an
economic catastrophe. This catastrophe was entirely self-inflicted and
avoidable.

The fundamental problem is that modern financial systems left to themselves
inevitably create debt in excessive quantities, and in particular debt that does
not fund new capital investment but rather the purchase of already existing
assets, above all real estate.

Heating a house or fueling a car is socially valuable, but the carbon emissions
produced have a harmful effect on the climate. Lending a family money to buy a
house can be socially useful, but too much mortgage debt in total can make the
economy unstable. So debt pollution, like environmental pollution, must be
constrained by public policy.

One objective of this book is therefore to define the policies needed to prevent
excessive debt creation leading to future financial crises.

The second is to propose how to escape from the debt overhang which past policy
errors have bequeathed and which continues to depress economic growth across the
developed world.

Finally I aim to identify why mainstream modern economics failed to see the
crisis coming, and why it so confidently asserted that increasing financial
activity had made the world a safer place.

At the core of financial instability in modern economies, this book argues, lies
the interaction between the infinite capacity of banks to create new credit,
money, and purchasing power, and the scarce supply of irreproducible urban land.

Is that true, and are future crises, as bad as 2007–2008, therefore inevitable?
My answer is no, and I argue in this book that it should be possible and is
essential to develop a less credit-intensive growth model. But I also argue that
it will only be possible if we recognize and respond to three underlying drivers
of increasing credit intensity.

The first is the increasing importance of real estate in modern economies. The
second driver is increasing inequality. The third driver is global
current-account imbalances unrelated to long-term investment flows and useful
capital investment.

These three factors each result in a growth of debt that does not support
productive capital investment and does not therefore generate new income streams
with which debt can be repaid.

Financial and economic stability will only be attainable if we address these
underlying factors.

Certainly we should use public policy sanctions penalize incompetent or reckless
behavior. Certainly we should address the too-big-to-fail problem. But such
policies will never be sufficient to achieve a more stable economy. Nor, either,
will central bank policy still operating within the assumption that we can have
one objective—low inflation, and one instrument—the interest rate.

We must also recognize that financial instability is inherent in any financial
system that is allowed to create credit, money, and purchasing power, and we
must decide how radically to address that fact.

Credit creation is too important to be left to the bankers: future policies need
to reflect that fact.

While designing a better system for the future, we must also navigate as best
possible out of the debt overhang left by past policy mistakes.

My proposals will horrify many economists and policymakers, and in particular
central bankers.

In the pre-crisis years economic orthodoxy was characterized by an anathema
against government money creation and a totally relaxed attitude to whatever
level of private credit free markets generated. But the latter led to a disaster
from which many ordinary citizens throughout the world are still suffering. To
prevent future crises we need far tighter controls on private credit creation
than we had before the crisis. [\*](#ASIN:B00WY4OWL8;LOC:418)

Finance has a distinctive ability to grow beyond its socially useful size,
making private profit from activities that add no true social value.

In the United Kingdom, finance has accounted for a growing share of national
income.

But it is the financial crisis of 2007–2008 that makes it not merely interesting
but vital to ask searching questions about the economic impact of this huge
increase in financial intensity.

The crisis and its aftermath have been an economic catastrophe.

We cannot therefore avoid the questions: Which aspects of this growing financial
intensity were beneficial and which harmful? Which led to the crisis, and how
radically must we now reform to prevent a repeat?

Finance made much more money out of providing credit to the economy, and in
particular credit to households.

Indeed, a central argument of this book is that the high level of private debt
built up before the crisis is the most fundamental reason the 2007–2008 crisis
wrought such economic harm.

The sheer complexity of the securitized credit and shadow banking system on the
eve of the crisis is mind boggling.

Increased complexity made the financial system inherently less stable, and it
facilitated excessive credit extension and leverage in the real economy. As a
result it both made the crisis more likely and the consequences more severe.

Rising inequality has been a striking feature of most advanced economies over
the past 30 years, and the financialization of the economy has played a major
role in that increase.

The assumption that market completion and liquidity would inevitably generate
favorable results rested on an overt and sophisticated, though mistaken, theory.
The conclusions followed if the Efficient Market Hypothesis applied.

As Mervyn King, then governor of the Bank of England, put it in a lecture in
autumn 2012, the dominant theoretical model of modern monetary economics “lacks
an account of financial intermediation, so money, credit and banking play no
meaningful role.”

Theoretical assertion and apparent empirical support therefore coalesced into a
strong pre-crisis consensus: more finance was good for the economy, making the
latter both more efficient and more stable. But the consensus turned out to be
completely wrong.

Beyond some point, and in particular where debt is concerned, more finance can
be harmful, and free market finance can fail to serve well society’s needs.

In fact financial markets, when left to free-market forces, can generate
activity that is privately profitable but not socially useful. There can be too
much finance, too much trading, and too much market completion.
[\*](#ASIN:B00WY4OWL8;LOC:754)

Two theoretical propositions in particular played a central role in the
pre-crisis orthodoxy in both finance and macroeconomics—the Efficient Market
Hypothesis (EMH) and the Rational Expectations Hypothesis (REH).

But real-world evidence and more realistic theory contradict both hypotheses.
They show that human beings are not fully rational, and that even if they were,
market imperfections could produce unstable financial markets that diverge far
from rational equilibrium levels.

Both the EMH and REH are flawed, because they fail to recognize that the future
is characterized by inherent irreducible uncertainty and not mathematically
modelable risk.

Financial markets are bound to be susceptible to inefficiency and collective
irrationality.

The crucial question is whether increasing financial intensity makes financial
markets and the macroeconomy more unstable.

The most important reason the 2008 crisis was followed by such a deep recession
and weak recovery was excessive private credit creation in the preceding
decades.

Banking systems left to themselves are bound to create too much of the wrong
sort of debt, instability, and crisis.

Fixing the banks will not be sufficient to fix the economy. More radical
policies will be required.

Banks create credit, money, and thus purchasing power. They make loans to
borrowers, crediting an asset on the banks’ balance sheet; at the same time they
put money in the borrowers’ account, creating a bank liability.

The vast majority of what we count as “money” in modern economies is created in
this fashion: in the United Kingdom 98% of money takes this form,and only 2%
represents the notes and coins liabilities of the state.

How much credit banks create and to what purposes that credit is devoted are
therefore issues of vital importance.

Shadow banking activities create credit and money equivalents outside the formal
banking sector.

Central banks gravitated to the belief that, provided interest rates were
maintained at levels that ensured low and stable inflation, the amount of credit
that the banking system created would be of no concern. Low and stable inflation
was sufficient to ensure financial and macroeconomic stability. But the crisis
of 2007–2008 proved that assumption quite wrong. Excessive credit produced a
crisis, even though inflation remained subdued.

Most credit in advanced economies is not used to finance new capital investment.

In most modern banking systems most credit does not finance new capital
investment. Instead, it funds the purchase of assets that already exist and,
above all, existing real estate.

Credit to finance investment in non–real estate assets accounts for no more than
14% of the UK total.

The UK mortgage credit and house price boom of 2000–2007 was primarily an
existing assets boom, with only a relatively small rise in construction.

It is vital indeed to understand that an advanced economy in which there was no
new investment in real estate at all would also almost certainly be one in which
most new bank credit was extended to finance real estate.

Faced with severe debt overhang,the result has been seven years of recession and
only weak recovery.

From the 1990s on, Japan provided a warning of the huge damage a debt overhang
can cause. Two decades of slow growth and gradual price deflation followed.

Recessions are on average much deeper and longer lasting when preceded by large
build-ups of mortgage debt.

Financial crises and bank insolvencies can cause great harm, but the debt
overhang created by excessive private credit creation can be more harmful still.

Both Japan’s experience in the 1990s and Western experience after the 2007–2008
crisis show that restoring potential credit supply is insufficient to restore
growth.

Credit supply at low price was ensured, but credit demand was lacking because of
the debt overhang effect.

Public debate after the 2007–2008 crisis was skewed far too much toward the
credit supply problem and that we were slow to realize the severity of the debt
overhang challenge.

Fixing the banks is clearly doable. In contrast, a severe debt overhang appears
to make all policy levers ineffective.

In most countries the reason public debt has increased rapidly since the crisis
is simple: excessive private credit creation produced a crisis and post-crisis
recession.

In the United Kingdom the total net costs of bailing out the banks - including
equity injections, guarantees, and central bank liquidity support - have
amounted to about 1.3% of GDP, but public debt as a share of GDP has soared from
44% in 2007 to 92% in 2013.

So leverage has not fallen but has simply shifted from the private to the public
sector. In addition it has shifted between countries.

To understand excessive credit creation and debt overhang, we must therefore
take a global perspective.

Once debt has first grown to excessive levels, all traditional policy levers
appear blocked or have adverse side effects. Debt overhang seems to be a trap
from which there is no clear escape.

Surely, it seems, we need an answer to the question: how will public debts ever
be repaid?

Given the purposes for which bank credit is actually used in advanced economies,
ultra-low interest rates are likely to stimulate speculation in existing assets
more than they stimulate new business investment.

The severe difficulties that debt overhang creates, and the huge economic cost
of the post-2008 recession and weak recovery, certainly make it vital to achieve
future growth without excessive credit creation.

Shadow banking, financial innovation, and intense trading among financial
institutions hardwired instability into the financial system, gave us the credit
cycle on steroids, and made a severe debt overhang more likely.

The summary scorecard on three decades of financial innovations is therefore
simple; whatever their theoretical advantages, their actual impact was a
disaster. But one assertion made by the pre-crisis optimists was undoubtedly
true: the new technology facilitated more credit creation.

Policies to mitigate the fundamental drivers of credit-intensive growth are
essential: central banks and regulators alone cannot make the financial system
and economies stable.

Even if we achieve maximum imaginable success in addressing the fundamental
drivers of credit-intensive growth, we will still be left with credit and asset
price cycles arising from the interface between the infinitely elastic supply of
private credit and money, and the inelastic supply of existing irreproducible
assets (in particular, real estate).

We cannot therefore avoid the question that Hyman Minsky posed—whether a
monetary economy with debt contracts and capitalist financial institutions will
ever be stable, and in particular whether stability is possible as long as there
are fractional reserve banks.

Debt contracts and banks make financial instability inevitable. Left to itself,
a free financial system will produce too much private credit.

But shouldn’t we fix the problem by structural reforms rather than expecting
central banks and regulators to manage an inherently unstable system?

Credit markets raise issues of vital general public interest: free market
approaches to them are simply not valid.

In a world where free markets left to themselves will produce too much debt, and
where tax regimes magnify that bias, implicit taxes on credit creation can be a
good thing.

“if we are going to fix the financial system, we must address the key problem:
the inflexibility of debt contracts.”

If financial innovation is to make a major contribution to a more stable
economy, it must address the largest debt category—lending against real estate.

There is no silver bullet: no single structural policy that will remove the
risks created by debt contracts, private money creation, and price cycles in
existing assets. We cannot therefore avoid a significant role for central banks
and financial regulators in constraining and managing the quantity and the mix
of debt.

The pre-crisis orthodoxy that we could set one objective (low and stable
inflation) and deploy one policy tool (the interest rate) produced an economic
disaster.

The fundamental reason recovery from the Great Recession has been slow and weak
is the debt overhang.

Growing out of debt burdens will be far more difficult than in the post-war
period. Indeed, in some countries the mathematics make it impossible.

Sometimes debts simply cannot be and will not be fully repaid. Other ways out of
the debt overhang will have to be found. [\*](#ASIN:B00WY4OWL8;LOC:3981)

If debts cannot be eroded away by either real growth or inflation, they could be
reduced by default and debt restructuring.

Rather than creditors receiving an undiminished nominal value degraded in real
terms through inflation, the nominal value of debts could be reduced.
[\*](#ASIN:B00WY4OWL8;LOC:3993)

The more realistic alternative involves negotiated debt write-downs and
restructurings to reduce debts to sustainable levels, while avoiding the
disruptive effect of bankruptcy and default. It can be applied to either private
or public debts.

Excessive private credit creation produces crisis, debt overhang, and
post-crisis deflation, and as a result, rising public debt burdens: leverage
doesn’t go away, it simply shifts from the private to the public sector. But
once it has shifted to public debt, it may be easier to negotiate restructuring
and write-down without harmful shocks to confidence.

The Bank of England owns government bonds worth 23% of GDP. Writing some of them
off would not remove entirely the need for further improvement in public
finances, but it would reduce the required pace and severity of fiscal
consolidation. [\*](#ASIN:B00WY4OWL8;LOC:4079)

If we first admit that money finance is possible, how will we ensure we do not
use it to excess?

The risks of money finance are thus not technical but political.

If governments are allowed to print money to finance deficits, they will be
tempted to do so before elections, to spend it on favored political
constituencies, and to run large fiscal deficits on a permanent basis rather
than make tough choices about tax and public expenditure.

In the United Kingdom, for instance, there is no reason why the Bank of England
Monetary Policy Committee, if equipped with the legal power, could not have
approved in 2009 and 2010 a £35 billion helicopter money
[\*](#ASIN:B00WY4OWL8;LOC:4151) operation to finance increased fiscal
expenditure, instead of £375 billion of quantitative easing. And no reason it
could not have refused to approve a larger helicopter money operation if it
believed that would endanger inflation above the 2% target.

The potential to use monetary finance to escape from debt overhang and deflation
should not therefore be excluded on the grounds that it will lead inevitably to
excessive inflation and fiscal indiscipline.

Allowing monetary finance is dangerous, since governments may create fiat money
in excessive quantities and misallocate the resulting spending power to
inefficient ends. But the alternative route to adequate nominal demand—by means
of private credit creation—is also dangerous, since free financial markets left
to themselves are bound to create credit in excessive quantities and allocate it
inefficiently, generating unstable booms and busts, debt overhangs, and
post-crisis recessions.

Pre-crisis macroeconomic orthodoxy combined total anathema against fiat money
finance with an almost totally relaxed attitude to private credit creation.
Optimal future policy must reflect the reality that we face a choice of dangers
and must combine far tighter controls on private credit creation with the
disciplined use of fiat money finance when needed. Our refusal to use that
option until now has depressed economic growth; led to unnecessarily severe
fiscal austerity; and, by committing us to sustained very low interest rates,
increased the rmacroeconomic rules will ensure social optimality is very elegant
and appealing. But it was a fatal conceit that produced the disaster of
2007–2008, from whose consequences many ordinary citizens around the world are
still suffering.

isks of future financial instability.

We need a new approach to economics and to public policy.

You cannot see a crisis coming if you have theories and models that assume that
the crisis is impossible.

At the core of macroeconomic instability in modern economies lies the
interaction between the limitless capacity of unconstrained private banking and
shadow banking systems to create credit, money, and purchasing power, and the
inelastic supply and rising demand for locationally specific urban land.

The idea that free financial markets plus simple macroeconomic rules will ensure
social optimality is very elegant and appealing. But it was a fatal conceit that
produced the disaster of 2007–2008, from whose consequences many ordinary
citizens around the world are still suffering.

