Blessed Are the Organized: Grassroots Democracy in America
==========================================================

By **Jeffrey Stout**

A politics completely empty of the vehement passions…tends in practice to be
antidemocratic.  It cedes the authority of decision making to elites – experts
and social engineers – who characteristically present themselves as
disinterested and rational agents, intent only on maximising fairness and
efficiency. The actual victims of injustice are thus assigned to passive roles,
as objects of pity and as potential beneficiaries of properly rationalised
decision-making. Expressions of anger on the part of the underclass violate the
elite code of decorum. 

In a society where surplus value in the form of profits is taxed in order to
benefit the entire population…it should be possible to in principal to
compensate workers adequately for the imbalances implicit in the basic
contractual arrangements of a profit driven economy…Executives…often make
millions of dollars a year, and use then use a portion of their profits to
influence the political system to deregulate corporations and drastically cut
taxes paid by the wealthy. 

Because a just society gives everyone his or her due, the circle of moral
concern must be expanded to include everyone affected by society’s arrangements
and policies.  This means every citizen’s voice must not only be heard, but
given due consideration.  To be denied such consideration is an affront to
justice and liberty.  Liberty can be defined as security from domination.  Love
of liberty and hatred of domination are two sides of the same coin. 

A press hiding behind a claim of even-handedness cannot perform the role that
justifies its constitutionally protected freedom. A press that pretended to be
neutral on the difference between domination and accountability would be a press
that had already sided implicitly with domination.

Democratic constitutions place power in the people's hands. That power might
rein in powerful elites if enough citizens made good use of it.

Holders of high office will always have power at their disposal, but in a
healthy democracy that power can be held in check…Ordinary citizens, by relating
wisely to one another and to the elites, are able to influence and contest
decisions made on high. No society can free itself from domination unless
citizens make good use of the power at their disposal.

…political equality…is centred in the notion that every law-abiding citizen in a
society bears responsibility for the condition of that society’s arrangements
and ought therefore to be recognised by others – and under law- as entitled too
fulfil that responsibility.

The debate over democracy goes awry when people assume that society must choose
between a perfectly rigid hierarchical system and a perfectly flexible culture
of freedom, the former committed to unchanging absolutes, the latter prepared to
tolerate anything but intolerance. No actual society exhibits either of these
patterns.  There is no need to choose between them.

Substantial freedoms for ordinary citizens can be found only in a society bound
by, and capable of enforcing, determinate legal and ethical norms prohibiting
relationships of domination.

Substantial freedoms for ordinary people can be achieved only in a justly
administered system of just laws.  Without such laws there can be no security…

…the nation-state, as it now exists, does not seem capable of framing,
administering, or enforcing laws justly. It is true that the nation-state is not
capable of doing these things when citizens fail to cultivate and exercise power
of their own.  

Democratic political power derives from being organised.  Developers are already
well organised. Corporate bosses in general derive power from organisations that
use market incentives to induce cooperative behaviour. For there to be a
balancing counter power of a sort that would foster democratic accountability,
organisations of other kinds, including religious institutions, will have to
provide it. Pastors, no less than CEOs, occupy leadership roles in politically
significant organisations. There is no getting around this.

To claim to speak for others without having listened to them and without being
held accountable to them is either to pretend to have power one does not in fact
have, or to stand in a relation of dominance over one’s followers.

Grassroots democrats offer what appears to be a devastating critique of
politics-as-usual.  It claims that party politics is incapable, by itself, of
preventing dominant classes from having their way with the rest of us.  Unless
ordinary citizens organise themselves, educate themselves and hold the powers
that be accountable, interest groups, big money and manipulation of the public
are bound to keep the most important forms of domination in place.  

Letters to the editor, static on the blogosphere and the occasional public
demonstration are not enough to rein in the rich and the lucky. But neither is
participation in an organisation the true purpose of which is to strengthen the
hand of a particular politician. It is irrelevant that he regards himself as a
permanent ally of the average citizen. 

The more politicians talk about change, the more things remain the same.  They
talk about change because they know we are unhappy with how things are going,
but they don't want to commit themselves to anything substantive.  The term
change has done the trick because of its vagueness.  We will know that
significant change is coming when citizens are too well organised to be tricked
– and too powerful to be ignored – demand laws and institutions able to prevent
corporate elites from exercising power arbitrarily over others at home and
abroad. 

Of some things, however, we can be certain.  To maintain a position of
dominance, even the most powerful people in the world rely on the inaction of
others and the resignation that lies beneath it.  The powerful become powerful
by organising others to work for them and creating incentives for profitable
cooperative activity.  It appears against the interest of the rich and the lucky
for everyone else to be similarly well organised. The rich and the lucky benefit
from making large-scale democratic reform appear hopeless. 

To understand grassroots democracy one needs to experience something like the
face-to-face interactions in which its spirit takes shape and acquires
organisational and evaluative substance. 

While demonstrations create a little mayhem, the G8 summit carries on with its
business unperturbed.  Racial social critics preach to the choir, while the
choir says Amen, but the ritual exchange of sentiment serves only to persuade
the participants that their own dispositions are righteous. Meanwhile centrist
politics masquerades as grassroots democracy…Mainstream candidates offer
something intermediary to hope for and an equal indeterminate way of bringing
change about.  The … rhetoric of change puts the idealistic cart before the
organisational horse, and then neglects to feed the horse.

[amzn:069113586X]

