A Brief History Of Neoliberalsim (2005)
=======================================
![](/bookimg/briefhistoryofneoliberalsim.jpg)

Neoliberalism is in the first instance a theory of political economic practices
that proposes that human well being can best be advanced by liberating
individual entrepreneurial freedoms and skills within an international framework
characterised by strong private property rights, free markets and free trade.
The role of the state is to create and preserve an institutional framework
appropriate to such practices. The state has to guarantee, for example, the
quality and integrity of money. It must also set up those military, defence,
police and legal structures and functions required to secure private property
rights and to guarantee, by force if need be, the proper functioning of markets.
Furthermore, if markets do not exist (in areas such as land, water, education,
health care, social security, or environmental pollution) then they must be
created, by state action if necessary. But beyond these tasks, the state should
not venture. State interventions in markets (once created) must be kept to a
bare minimum because, according to the theory, the state cannot possibly possess
enough information to second-guess market signals (prices) and because powerful
interest groups will inevitably distort and bias state intervention
(particularly in democracies) for their own benefit. 

Redistributive effects and increasing social inequality has in fact been such a
persistent feature of neoliberalisation as to be regarded as structural to the
whole project. Gérard Duménil and Dominique Lévey, after careful reconstruction
of the data, have concluded that that neoliberalisation was from the very
beginning a project to achieve a restoration of class power.

In October 1979 Paul Volker, chairman of the US Federal Reserve Bank under
President Carter, engineered a draconian shift in US monetary policy. The long
standing commitment in the US liberal democratic state to the principals of the
New Deal, which meant broadly Keynesian fiscal and monetary policies with full
employment as the key objective, was abandoned in favour of a policy designed to
quell inflation no matter what the consequences might be for employment.

Thus began ‘a long deep recession that would empty factories and break unions in
the US and drive debtor countries to the brink of insolvency, beginning the long
era of structural adjustment’. 

And so began the momentous shift towards greater social inequality and the
restoration of economic power to the upper class.

The US imperial tradition had been long in the making, and to a great degree
defined itself against the imperial traditions of Britain, France, Holland, and
other European powers…The paradigm case was worked out in Nicaragua in the 1920s
and 1930s, when US marines were deployed to protect US interests…The answer was
to find a local strongman…and provide economic and military assistance to him
and his family and immediate allies so that they could repress or buy off the
opposition and accumulate considerable wealth and power for themselves. In
return they would always keep their country open to the operations of US capital
and support, and when necessary promote US interests both in the country and the
region... 

In the post-war period, much of the non-communist world was opened up to US
domination by tactics of this sort…The stories told in John Perkins’s
Confessions of a Economic Hit Man are full of ugly and unsavoury details of how
this was all too often done.

While the consent of local ruling elites could be purchased easily enough, the
need to coerce oppositional or social democratic movements associated the US
with a long history of largely covet violence throughout much of the developing
world. 

The IBM and the World Bank thereafter became the centres for the propagation and
enforcement of ‘free market fundamentalism’ and neoliberal orthodoxy. In return
for debt rescheduling, indebted countries were required to implement
institutional reforms, such as cuts in welfare expenditures, more flexible
labour market laws and privatisation.

What the Mexico case demonstrated, however, was a key difference between liberal
and neoliberal practice: under the former lenders take the losses that arise
from bad investment decisions, while under the latter the borrowers are forced
by the state and international powers to take on board the cost of debt
repayments no matter what the consequences for the livelihood and well-being of
the local population.  

In the event of conflict between Main Street and Wall Street, the latter was to
be favoured. The real possibility then arises that while Wall Street does well
the rest of the US (as well as the rest of the world) does badly…While the
slogan was often advanced in the 1960s that what was good for General Motors was
good for the US, this had changed by the 1990s to the slogan that what is good
for Wall Street is all that matters.

One substantial core of raising class power under neoliberalism lies, therefore,
with the CEOs, the key operators on corporate boards, and the leaders in the
financial, legal, and technical apparatus that surrounds this inner sanctum of
capitalist activity. 

While there are obvious links between these sorts of activities and the world of
finance, the incredible ability not only to amass large personal fortunes but
also to exercise a controlling power over large segments of the economy confers
on these few individuals an immense economic power to influence political
processes.

In complex societies he [Karl Polanyi] pointed out, the meaning of freedom
becomes contradictory and as fraught as its incitements to action as compelling.
There are, he noted, two kinds of freedom, one good and the other bad. Among the
latter he listed ‘the freedom to exploit one’s fellows, or the freedom to make
inordinate gains without commensurable service to the community, the freedom to
keep technological inventions from being used for public benefit, or the freedom
to profit from public calamities secretly engineered for private advantage.

‘Planning and control are being attacked as a denial of freedom. Free enterprise
and private ownership are declared to be essentials of freedom. No society built
on other foundations is said to deserve to be called free. The freedom that
regulation creates is denounced as un-freedom; the justice, liberty and welfare
if offers are decried as camouflage for slavery’.

The idea of freedom ‘thus degenerates into a mere advocacy of free enterprise’,
which means ‘the fullness of freedom for those whose income, leisure and
security need no enhancing, and a mere pittance of liberty for the people, who
may in vain attempt to make use of their democratic rights to gain shelter from
the owners of property.

Liberal or neoliberal utopianism is doomed in Polanyi’s view to be frustrated by
authoritarianism, or even outright fascism. The good freedoms are lost and the
bad ones take over. 

How is it then that ‘the rest of us’ have so easily acquiesced in this sate of
affairs? 

What Gramsci calls 'common sense' (defined as sense held in common) typically
grounds consent.

Common sense is constructed out of long standing practices of cultural
socialisation often rooted deep in regional or national conditions. It is not
the same as 'good sense' that can be constructed out of critical engagement with
the issues of the day. Common sense can, therefore be profoundly misleading,
obfuscating or disguising real problems under cultural prejudices. Cultural and
traditional values (such as belief in God and country or views about the
position of women in society) and fears (of communists, immigrants or 'others')
can be invoked that mask specific strategies beneath vague rhetorical devices. 

An open project around the restoration of economic power to a small elite would
probably not gain much popular support. But a programmatic attempt to advance
the cause of individual freedoms could appeal to a mass base and so disguise the
drive to restore class power. Furthermore, once the state apparatus made the
neoliberal turn it could use its powers of persuasion, co-optation, bribery, and
treat to maintain the climate of consent necessary to perpetuate its power. This
was Thatcher and Reagan’s particular forte…

Coercion can produce a fatalistic, even abject, acceptance of the idea that
there was and is, as Margaret Thatcher kept insisting, ‘no alternative’. 

The worldwide political upheavals of 1968, for example, were strongly inflected
with the desire for greater personal freedoms. This was certainly true of the
students…they demanded freedom from parental, educational, corporate,
bureaucratic, and state constraints. But the ’68 movement also had social
justice as a primary objective.

Values of individual freedoms and social justice are not, however, necessary
compatible. Pursuit of social justice presupposes social solidarities and a
willingness to submerge individual wants for, say, social equality or
environmental justice.

Why it is not impossible to bridge such differences, it is not hard to see how a
wedge might be driven between them. Neoliberal rhetoric, with its foundational
emphasis upon individual freedoms, has the power to split off libertarianism,
identity politics, multi-culturalism, and eventually narcissistic consumerism
from the social forces ranged in pursuit of social justice through the conquest
of state power.

Neoliberalism did not create these distinctions, but it could easily exploit, if
not foment, them.

In the early 70s those seeking individual freedoms and social justice could make
common cause in the face of what many saw as a common enemy. Powerful
corporations in alliance with an interventionist state were seen to be running
the world in individually oppressive and socially unjust ways.

But capitalist corporations, business, and the market system were also seen as
primary enemies, requiring redress if not revolutionary transformation: hence
the threat to capitalist class power. By capturing ideals of individual freedoms
and turning them against the interventionist and regulatory practices of the
state, capitalist interests could hope to protect even restore their position.

In 1971, Lewis Powel, about to be appointed as a Supreme Court judge by Richard
Nixon, wrote in a confidential memo to the US Chamber of Commerce that -
criticism of and opposition to the US free enterprise system had gone too far
and that 'the time has come - indeed it is long overdue - for the wisdom,
ingenuity and resources the American business to be marshalled against those who
would destroy it'. 'Strength' he wrote, 'lies in organisation, in careful
long-range planning and implementation, in consistency of action over an
indefinite period of years, in the scale of financing available only through
joint effort, and in the political power available only through united action
and national organisations'. The National Chamber of Commerce', he argued,
'should lead an assault upon the major institutions - universities, schools, the
media, publishing, the courts - in order to challenge how individuals think
'about the corporation, the law, culture and the individual'. US business did
not lack resources for such an effort, particularly when pooled.

...the American Chamber of Commerce subsequently expanded its base from around
60,000 firms in 1972 to over a quarter of a million ten years later. Jointly
with the National Association of Manufacturers it amassed an immense campaign
chest to lobby Congress and engage in research. The Business Roundtable
'committed to the aggressive pursuit of political power for the
corporation'...The corporations involved accounted for 'about half of the GNP of
the United States' during the 1970s...Think tanks...were formed with corporate
backing both to polemicise and where necessary...to construct serious technical
and empirical studies and political-philosophical studies in support of
neoliberal policies.

Nearly half of the financing for the highly respected National Bureau of
Economic Research came from the leading companies on the Fortune 500 list.
Closely integrated with the academic community, the NBER was to have a very
significant impact on thinking in the economic departments and business schools
of the major universities.

In singling our universities for particular attention, Powel pointed out an
opportunity as well as am issue, for these were indeed centres of anti-corporate
sentiment. But many students were affluent and privileged, or at least
middle-class, and in the US the values of individual freedom have long been
celebrated as primary. Neoliberal themes could here find fertile ground for
propagation.

But exactly how was state power to be deployed to reshape common sense
understanding? One line of response to the double crisis of capital accumulation
and class power arose in the trenches of the urban struggles of the 1970s. The
New York fiscal crisis was an iconic case.

As the recession gathered pace, the gap between revenues and outlays in the New
York City budget increased. At first the financial institutions were prepared to
bridge the gap, but in 1975 a powerful cabal of investment bankers refused to
roll over the debt and pushed the city into technical bankruptcy. The bail out
that followed entailed the construction of new institutions that took over the
management of the city budget. The effect was to curb the aspirations of the
city’s powerful municipal unions, to implement wage freezes and cutbacks in
public employment and social provision and to impose user fees. The final
indignation was the requirement that unions should invest their pension funds in
city bonds.

This amounted to a coup by the financial institutions against the democratically
elected government of New York City, as it was every bit as effective and the
military coup that had earlier occurred in Chile. Wealth was redistributed to
the upper class in the midst of a fiscal crisis. It was an early, perhaps
decisive battle in a new war, the purpose of which was to show others that what
was happening in New York could and in some cases would, happen to them.

The management of the New York fiscal crisis pioneered the way for neoliberal
practices both domestically under Reagan and internationally through the IMF in
the 1980s. It established the principal that in the event of a conflict between
the integrity of financial institutions on bondholders’ returns, on one hand,
and the well being of the citizens on the other, the former was to be
privileged.  It emphasised that the role of government was to create a good
business climate rather than look to the needs and well being of the population
at large.

During the 1970s, business refined its ability to act as a class, submerging
competitive instincts in favour of joint, cooperative action in the legislation
arena.

In order to realize this gaol, business needed a political class instrument and
a popular base. They therefore sough to capture the Republican Party as their
own instrument. The supposedly ‘progressive’ campaign finance laws of 1971
legalised the corruption of politics.

The Republican Party needed, however, a solid electoral base if it was to
colonise power effectively. It was around this time that Republicans sought an
alliance with the Christian right. This political base could be mobilised
through the positives or religion and cultural nationalism and negatively
through coded, if not blatant, racism, homophobia, and anti-feminism. The
problem was not capitalism and the neoliberalisation of culture, but the
‘liberals’ who had used excessive state power to provide for special groups.

The effect was to divert attention from capitalism and corporate power as in any
way having anything to do with either the economic or the cultural problems that
unbridled commercialism and individualism were creating.

From then on the unholy alliance between big business and conservative
Christians backed by the neoconservatives steadily consolidated, eventually
eradicating all liberal elements from the Republican Party, particularly after
the 1990s, and tuning it into the relatively homogenous right-wing electoral
force of present times.

The Democratic Party, on the other hand, was fundamentally riven by the need to
placate, if not succour, corporate and financial interests while a the same time
making some gestures towards improving the material conditions of life for its
popular base. During the Clinton presidency it ended up choosing the former over
the latter and therefore fell directly into the neoliberal fold of policy
prescription and implementation…Social policy was in effect put in the care of
Wall Street bondholders, with predictable consequences

Reagan’s election in 1980 was only the first step in the long road to
consolidating the political shift necessary to support Volker’s turn to
monetarism and the prioritisation of the fight against inflation.

The Labour Relations Board…was converted by Reagan appointees into a vehicle for
attacking and regulating the rights of labour at the very moment when business
was being deregulated. It took less that six months if 1983 to reverse nearly 40
percent of the decisions made in the 1970’s that had been, in the view of
business, too favourable to labour. Regan construed all regulation (except of
labour) as bad.

All this demanded a rationale, and to this end the war of ideas did play and
important role…The business press, with the Wall Street Journal very much in the
lead, took up these ideas, becoming an open advocate for neoliberalism as the
necessary solution to all economic ills...Charting the spread of ideas is always
difficult, but by 1990 or so most economic departments in the major research
universities as well as the business schools were dominated by neoliberal modes
of thought.  The importance of this is should not be underestimated.  The US
research universities were and are the training grounds for many foreigners who
take what they learn back to their countries of origin – the key figures in
Chile’s and Mexico’s adaption to neoliberalism were US-trained economists for
example – as well as into international institutes such as the IMF, the World
Bank and the UN. 

During the 1970s, the political wing of the nation’s corporate sector staged one
of the most remarkable campaigns in the pursuit of power in recent history. 

The construction of consent in Britain occurred in a very different way. In
Britain there was no Christian right to speak of to be mobilised into a moral
majority. Corporate power was little inclined to support overt political
activism, preferring instead to exercise influence through the network of class
and privilege that had long connected government, academia, the judiciary, and
the permanent Civil Service with the leaders of industry and finance. The
political situation was also radically different, given that the Labour Party
had largely been constructed as an instrument of working-class power, beholding
to strong and sometimes quite militant trade unions. Britain has consequentially
developed a far more elaborate and all-encompassing welfare state than would
have ever been dreamed of in the US…Even when the Conservative Party took power
for prolonged periods after the Second World War it largely refrained for any
attempt at dismantling the welfare state it had inherited. 

The commonality between the US and UK cases most obviously lies in the fields of
labour relations and the fight against inflation. With respect to the latter,
Thatcher made monetarism and strict budget control the order of the day. High
interest rates meant high unemployment. The bargaining power of labour was
weakened. And in an action that paralleled Reagan’s provocation of the PATCO in
1981, Thatcher provoked a miners’ strike in 1984…The strike lasted for almost a
year and in spite of a great deal of public support, the miners lost. The back
of a core element of the British labour movement had been broken.

Thatcher further reduced union power by opening up the UK to foreign competition
and foreign investment. Foreign competition demolished much of traditional
British industry in the 1980s…The overall effect was to transform the UK into a
country of relatively low wages and a compliant labour force within ten years.
By the time she left office, strike action had fallen to one-tenth of its former
levels. She had eradicated inflation, curbed union power, tamed the labour
force, and built middle-class consent for her policies in the process.

But Thatcher had to fight the battle on other fronts…Denigrating the progressive
labour councils as ‘loony lefties’ she then sought to sought to impose
neoliberal principals through a reform of municipal finance…Thatcher also set
out to privatise all those sectors of the economy that were in public
ownership…The legitimacy of the whole movement was underpinned, however, by the
extensive selling off or public housing…It satisfied traditional ideals of
individual property ownership as a working-class dream and introduced a new, and
often speculative, dynamism into the housing market that was much appreciated by
the middle classes, who saw their asset values rise – at least until the
property crash of the early 1990s.

Thatcher forged consent through the cultivation of a middle class that relished
in the joys of home ownership, private property, individualism, and the
liberation of entrepreneurial opportunities. With working-class solidarities
waning under pressure and job structures radically changing through
deindustrialisation, middle class values spread more widely to encompass many of
those who had once had a firm working-class identity. Neoliberalism entailed the
transformation of the older British class structure, at both ends of the
spectrum. 

While the Thatcher revolution was prepared by organisation of consent within the
traditional middle-classes who bore her to three electoral victories, the whole
programme, particularly on her first administration, was far more ideologically
driven by neoliberal theory than was ever the case in the US. 

The success of Reagan and Thatcher can be measured in various ways.  But I think
the most useful to stress is the way in which they took what had hitherto been
minority political, ideological, and intellectual positions and made them
mainstream. 

Reagan and Thatcher seized on the clues they had (from Chile and New York City)
and placed themselves a the head of a class movement that was determined to
restore its power…Those who followed, like Clinton and Blair, could do little
more than continue the good work of neoliberalism, whether they liked it or not.

According to the theory, the neoliberal state should favour strong individual
private property rights, the rule of law, and the institutions of freely
functioning markets and free trade...The legal framework is that of freely
negotiated contractual obligations between juridical individuals in the market
place…The state must therefore use its monopoly of the means of violence to
preserve those freedoms at all costs.  

Neoliberal theorists are, therefore, profoundly suspicious of democracy. 
Governance by majority rule is seen as a potential threat to individual rights.
Democracy is seen as a luxury, only possible under certain conditions of
relative affluence coupled with a strong middle-class presence to guarantee
political stability. Neoliberals therefore tend to favour governance by experts
and elites.

While individuals are supposedly free to choose, they are not supposed to
construct strong collectives institutions (such as trade unions) as opposed the
weak voluntary associations (like charitable organisations). To guard against
their greatest fears – fascism, communism, socialism, authoritarian populism,
and even majority rule – the neoliberals have to put strong limits on democratic
governance, relying instead upon undemocratic and unaccountable institutions
(such as the Federal Reserve and the IMF) to make decisions.

Faced with social movements that seek collective interventions, therefore, the
neoliberal state is itself forced to intervene, sometimes repressively, thus
denying the very freedoms it is supposed to uphold.  In this
situation…international competition and globalisation can be used to discipline
movements opposed to the neoliberal agenda within individual states. If that
fails, then the state must resort to persuasion, propaganda or, when necessary,
raw force and police power to suppress opposition to neoliberalism.

It the event of a conflict, the typical neoliberal state will tend to side with
a good business climate as opposed to either the collective rights (and quality
of life) of labour or the capacity of the environment to regenerate itself.

Internally, the neoliberal state is necessarily hostile to all forms of social
solidarity that put restraints on capital accumulation.  Independent trade
unions or other social movements (such as the municipal socialism of the Greater
London Council type), which acquired considerable power under embedded
liberalism, have therefore to be disciplined, if not destroyed.

The general outcome is lower wages, increasing job insecurity, and in many
instances loss of benefits and of job protections…it would seem that labour
control and maintenance of a high rate of labour exploitation have been central
to neoliberalisation all along. The restoration or formation of class power
occurs, as always, at the expense of labour.

As the state withdraws from welfare provision…the social safety net is reduced
to a bare minimum in favour of a system that emphasises personal responsibility.
Personal failure is generally attributed to personal failings, and the victims
are all too often blamed.

Behind these major shifts in social policy lie the important structural changes
in the nature of governance. Given the neoliberal suspicion of democracy, a way
has to be found to integrate the state decision-making into the dynamics of
capital accumulation and the networks of class power that are in the process of
restoration.  

Neoliberalisation has entailed, for example, increasing reliance on
private-public partnerships. Business and corporations not only collaborate
intimately with state actors but even acquire a strong role in writing
legislation, determining public policies, and setting regulatory frameworks
(which are mainly advantageous to themselves).

In many instances of private-public partnerships, particularly at municipal
level, the state assumes much of the risk while the private sector takes most of
the profits. If necessary, furthermore, neoliberal state will resort to coercive
legislation and policing tactics (anti-picketing rules for example) to disperse
or repress collective forms of opposition to corporate power.

While some sates continue to respect the traditional independence of the Civil
Service, this condition has everywhere been under threat in the course of
neoliberalism. The boundary between the state and corporate power has become
more and more porous. What remains of representative democracy is overwhelmed,
if not totally (though legally) corrupted by money power.

But all is not well with the neoliberal state, and it for this reason that if
appears to be either transitional or an unstable political form.  At the heart
of the problem lies a burgeoning disparity between the declared public aims of
neoliberalism – the well being of all - and it’s actual consequences - the
restoration of class power.

Most conventional analysis of the forces at work concentrate on some combination
of the power of neoliberal ideas, the need to respond to financial crises of
various sorts, and a more pragmatic approach to reform the state apparatus to
improve competitive position in the global market. 

While these have all been elements of some significance, the lack of any
examination of the class forces that might be at work is quite startling. The
possibility, for example, that the ruling ideas might be those of some ruling
class is not even considered, even though there is overwhelming evidence for
massive intervention on the part of business elites and financial interests in
the production of ideas and ideologies: through investment in think-tanks, in
the training of technocrats and in the command of the media. 

The possibility that financial crises might be caused by capital strikes,
capital flight, or financial speculation, or that financial crises are
deliberately engineered to facilitate accumulation by dispossession, is ruled
out as far to conspiratorial, even in the face of innumerable suspicious signs
of co-ordinated speculative attacks of this or that currency.

Weakening, bypassing, or violently destroying the power of organised labour is a
necessary precondition for neoliberalisation.

The degree that neoliberalisation has become integral to common-sense
understandings among the populace at large has varied greatly depending on the
strength of belief in the power of social solidarities and the importance of
traditions of collective social responsibility and provision.  

Even the most draconian of IMF restructuring programmes is unlikely to go
forward without a modicum of support from for someone. It sometimes seems as if
the IMF merely takes responsibility for doing what some internal class forces
want to do anyway.

But one persistent fact…has been the universal tendency to increase social
inequality and the expose the least fortunate in any society  - be it in
Indonesia, Mexico of Britain – to the chill winds of austerity and the dull fate
of increased marginalisation.

The incredible concentrations of wealth and power that now exist in the upper
echelons of capitalism have been not seen since the 1920s.

The very idea that this it might be – just might be – the fundamental core of
what neoliberalism has been about all along appears unthinkable.

It has been part of the genius of neoliberal theory to provide a benevolent mask
full of wonderful-sounding words like freedom, liberty, choice, and rights, to
hide the grim realities of the restoration or reconstitution of naked class
power, locally as well as transnationally, but most particularly to the main
financial centres of global capitalism.

\*\*

The spectacular emergence of China as a global economic power after the 1990s
was in part an unintended consequence of the neoliberal turn in the advanced
capitalist world.

What can be said with precision, is that China, by not taking the ‘shock
therapy’ path of instant privatisation later foisted on Russia and central
Europe by the IMF, the World Bank, and the ‘Washington Consensus’ in the 1900s,
managed to avert the economic disasters that beset those countries.

But the reforms also led to environmental degradation, social inequalities, and
eventually something that looks uncomfortably like the reconstruction of
capitalist class power.

The US is currently\*…running up enormous federal deficits and consumer debt
while insisting that everyone else must obey neoliberal rules. This is not a
sustainable position, and there are now many influential voices in the US
suggesting that it is steering right into the hurricanes of a major financial
crisis. (\* 2005)

For China, this would entail switching from a politics of labour absorption to a
politics of labour repression. Whether or not such a tactic can succeed, as it
did on Tiananmen Square in 1989, will depend crucially upon the balance of class
forces and how the Communist Party positions itself in relation to those forces.

If we lay aside…the claim that neoliberalisation is merely an example of
erroneous theory gone wild or a case of senseless pursuit of a false utopia,
then we are left with the tension between sustaining capitalism, on the one
hand, and the restoration/ reconstitution of ruling class power on the other. 

Furthermore, a global financial crisis in part provoked by its own reckless
economic policies would permit the US government to finally rid itself of any
obligation whatsoever to provide for the welfare on its citizens, except for the
ratcheting up of that military and police power that might be needed to quell
social unrest and compel global discipline.

But we can usefully scrutinize the historic-geographical record of
neoliberalisation for evidence of its powers as a potential cure-all for the
political-economic ills that currently threaten us. To what degree has
neoliberalism succeeded in stimulating capital accumulation?  It’s actual record
turns out to be nothing short of dismal.

Only in East and South East Asia, followed now to some extent by India, has
neoliberalisation be associated with any positive record of growth, and there
the not very neoliberal states played a very significant role. The contrast
between China’s growth and the Russian decline is stark. Informal employment has
soared worldwide and almost all global indicators on health levels, life
expectancy, infant mortality, and the like show losses rather than gains.

The reduction and control if inflation is the only systematic success
neoliberalisation can claim

Why, then, are so many persuaded that neoliberalisation through globalisation is
the ‘only alternative’ and that it has been successful?

First, the volatility of uneven geographical development has accelerated,
permitting certain territories to advance spectacularly (at least for a time) at
the expense of others. 

Secondly, neoliberalism, the process rather than the theory, has been a huge
success from the standpoint of the upper classes. It has either restored class
power to ruling elites or created conditions for capitalist class formation. 

With media dominated by the upper classes, the myth could be propagated that
states failed economically because they were not competitive. Increased social
inequality within a territory was constructed and necessary to encourage the
entrepreneurial risk and innovation that conferred competitive power and
stimulated growth. 

If conditions among the lower classes deteriorated, this was because they
failed, usually for personal and cultural reasons, to enhance their own human
capital.  In a Darwinian neoliberal world, the argument went, only the fittest
should and do survive.

The main substantive achievement of neoliberalisation, however, has been to
redistribute rather then generate wealth and income…under the rubric of
‘accumulation by dispossession’.  These include the commoditisation and
privatisation of land and the forceful expulsion of peasant populations;
conversion of various forms of property rights into exclusive private property
rights; suppression of rights to the commons; commodification of labour power
and the suppression of alternative forms of production and consumption;
monetisation of exchange and taxation, particularly of land; the slave trade;
and usury, the national debt and, most devastating of all, the use of the credit
system as a radical means of accumulation by dispossession. The state, with its
monopoly of violence and definitions of legality, plays a crucial role in both
backing and promoting these processes.

The rolling back of regulatory frameworks designed to protect labour and the
environment from degradation has entailed the loss of rights. The reversion of
common property rights won through years of hard class struggle (the right to a
state pension, to welfare, to national health care) into the private domain had
been one of the most egregious of all policies of dispossession, often procured
against the broad political will of the population.

Deregulation allowed the financial system to become one of the main centres of
redistributive activity through speculation, predation, fraud, and thievery. 
Stock promotions, ponzi schemes, structured asset destruction through inflation,
asset-stripping through mergers and acquisitions, the promotion of levels of
debt incumbency that reduced whole populations, even in advanced capitalist
countries, to debt peonage, to say nothing of corporate fraud, dispossession of
assets (the raiding of pension funds and their decimation by stock and corporate
collapse) by credit and stock manipulations – all of these became central
features of the capitalist financial system. 

The neoliberal state also redistributes wealth and income through revisions in
the tax code to benefit returns of investment rather than incomes and wages,
promotion of regressive elements in the tax code (such as sales tax), the
imposition of user fees and the provision of a vast array of subsidies and tax
breaks to corporations.  

The rise of surveillance and policing and incarceration of recalcitrant elements
of the population indicates a more sinister turn towards intense social control.
The prison-industrial complex is a thriving sector in the US economy.  In the
developing countries, where opposition to accumulation by dispossession can be
stronger, the role of the neoliberal state quickly assumes that of an active
repression even to the point of low-level warfare against oppositional
movements.

To presume that markets and market signals can best determine all allocative
decision in to presume that everything can in principal be treated as a
commodity. Commodification presumes the existence of property rights over
processes, things and social relations, that a price can be put on them and that
they can be traded subject to legal contract. The market is presumed to work as
an appropriate guide – an ethic – for all human action.

The loss of social protections in advanced capitalists countries has had
particularly negative affects on lower-class women, and in many of the
ex-communist countries of the Soviet Block the loss of women’s rights through
neoliberalisation had been nothing short of catastrophic. 

With some 2 billion people condemned to live on less than $2 a day, the taunting
world of capitalist consumer culture, the huge bonuses earned in financial
services, and the self-congratulatory polemics as to the emancipatory potential
of neoliberalism, privatisation, and personal responsibility must seem like a
cruel joke.

Stripped of the protective cover of lively democratic institutions and
threatened with all manner of social dislocations, a disposable workforce
inevitably turns to other institutional forms through which to construct social
solidarities and express a collective will. Everything, from gangs and criminal
cartels, narco-trafficking networks, mini-mafias and favela bosses, through
community, grassroots and non-government organisations, to secular cults and
religious sects proliferate. These are the alternative social forms that fill
the void left behind as state powers, political parties and other institutional
forms are actively dismantled or simply wither away as centres of collective
endeavour and social bonding.

To live under neoliberalism also means to accept or submit to that bundle of
rights necessary for capital accumulation. We live therefore in a society in
which the inalienable rights of individuals (and recall corporations are defined
as individuals before the law) to private property and the profit rate trump any
other conception of inalienable rights you can think of.

But the objection to this regime of rights is quite simple: to accept it is to
accept that we have no alternative but to live under a regime of endless capital
accumulations and economic growth no matter what the social, ecological, or
political consequences. Reciprocally, endless capital accumulation implies that
the neoliberal regime of rights must be geographically expanded across the globe
by violence, (Chile and Iraq) by imperialist practices (World Trade
Organisation, the IMF, and the World Bank) or through primitive accumulation
(China and Russia) if necessary. By hook or crook, the individual rights of
private property and the profit rate will be universally established. This is
precisely what George Bush meant when he said the US dedicates itself to extend
the sphere of freedom across the globe.

The neoliberal debasement of the concept of freedom ‘into a mere advocacy of
free enterprise’ can only mean, as Karl Polanyi points out, ‘the fullness of
freedoms for those whose income, leisure and security need no enhancing, and a
mere pittance of liberty for those people who may in vain attempt to make use of
their democratic rights to gain shelter from the power of the owners of
property’. 

For those left or cast outside the market system – a vast reservoir of
apparently disposable people bereft of social protections and supportive social
structures – there is little to be expected from neoliberalisation except
poverty, hunger, disease, and despair.  Their only hope is somehow scramble
aboard the market system either as petty commodity producers, as informal
vendors (of things or labour power), as petty predators to beg, steal, or
violently secure crumbs for the rich man’s table, or participate in the vast
illegal trade of trafficking in drugs, guns, women, or anything else illegal for
which there is a demand.

Obliged to live as appendages of the market and of capital accumulation rather
than as expressive human beings, the realm of freedom shrinks before the awful
logic and hollow intensity of market involvements.

There is abundant evidence that neoliberal theory and rhetoric (particularly the
rhetoric concerning liberty and freedom) has also all along primarily functioned
as a mask for practices that were all about the maintenance, reconstitution and
restoration of class power. The exploration of alternatives has therefore to
move outside the frames of reference defined by this class power and market
ethics while staying soberly anchored in the realities of our time and place.

There is a far, far nobler freedom to be won than that which neoliberalism
preaches. There is a far, far worthier system of governance to be constructed
than that which neoliberalism allows.

  
[amzn:B005X3SA74]

