Cryptocurrency: How Bitcoin and Digital Money are Challenging the Global Economic Order
=======================================================================================
New business models are extensions of a process that began far earlier with the
advent of the Internet. While no self-respecting bitcoiner would ever describe
Google or Facebook as decentralized institutions, GoogleAds allowed small
businesses to bypass big media organizations and to market more directly to
prospective customers; Facebook allowed people to organically form groups,
communities, and associations that weren’t tied down by geography or social and
national structures; Twitter meant people could design their own news feeds.


Is a clash building between these two movements, the corporate world’s
concentration of wealth and power, and Silicon Valley’s reempowerment of the
individual?


Perhaps these trends can continue to coexist if the decentralizing movement
remains limited to areas of the economy that don’t bleed into the larger sectors
that Big Business dominates. But that’s not what the proponents of this
technology foresee—especially those in the cryptocurrency sector. They believe
that decentralization is just getting started and that the centralized economic
and political establishments—even governments and nation-states, those ultimate
centralized loci of power—will be disrupted by it.


A phrase from Mastercoin’s David Johnston that some in the cryptocurrency
community call Johnston’s law could come true: “Everything that can be
decentralized will be decentralized.”


We may well be on the verge of a profound societal upheaval, perhaps the most
significant since the sixteenth century, when, in the second half of the
Renaissance, banking and the nation-state established themselves as the central
forces of power around which the world’s monetary and economic systems would
revolve.


When faced with these kinds of disruptive challenges from new technology and new
ways of organizing society, businesses and institutions that occupy the
center—those that represent the economic and political establishment—have three
choices. One is to just ignore the new idea, to dismiss the new idea and carry
on as normal. A second is to fight it, perhaps through political lobbying, or by
using advertising campaigns or smear campaigns to destroy the nascent threat
through negative associations in the public eye. A third is to try to adapt to
it, to incorporate, co-opt, or otherwise work with the new technology or
concept.


What of the nation-state itself? How will it respond? Ignore, fight, or co-opt?
The sovereign-money system, and especially the fiat money that gives the state
unchecked power to print currency as it sees fit, has arguably been the most
powerful weapon in the nation-state’s arsenal. More than just generating
seigniorage—the seductive idea that every dollar printed is an interest-free
loan flowing from the people to the state—controlling the nation’s money has
allowed governments to control the apparatus of power. With paper money they can
purchase arms, launch wars, raise debt to finance those conflicts, and then
demand tax payments in that same currency to repay those debts. A functioning
democracy should, in theory, put limits on all that. But in reality this
monetary system permits the extension of power. It funds bureaucracies and
agencies whose employees put their own survival above all else. In the worst
nation-states (think North Korea), it finances the instruments of terror and
repression that destroy people’s dignity.


If that system were to go away, the nation-state, whose interests lie like all
of ours in survival, would have to figure out how to respond. For the first time
in centuries these questions must now at least be asked.


From Silicon Valley, the impression is that human society is now ready to throw
out the centralized system altogether and embrace a decentralized model run by
“the crowd.”


Cutting welfare might have been in vogue in the era of small government that
emerged with Reagan, but as the ranks of unemployed and underemployed grow,
their political clout will, too. No matter what cryptocurrency technology can do
to bypass governments, it’s the interests of people like these that will
determine the laws and policies of the future.


Whereas cryptocurrency enthusiasts tend to think now of Google, Facebook,
Twitter, Apple, Microsoft, etc., as the centralized establishment—the enemy—it’s
worth remembering that they, too, once only existed as radical, disruptive ideas
from unheard-of start-ups.


Because the legal system was structured such that those start-ups were allowed
to flourish and seek profits, the world has changed.


One day the new crypto start-ups that currently hold the baton in society’s
ongoing fight for liberty will become part of the establishment themselves, much
as Google and Facebook now are.


The kind of payment products that Apple and others are toying with are built
upon the old bank-centric system and so are fraught with the same underlying
costs and inefficiencies, whereas bitcoin is free of them. But the question is,
what do people want? That brings us to the ultimate measure of whether
cryptocurrency can succeed: whether, when it is weighed against the competition,
people can be convinced of cryptocurrency’s benefits, dissuaded from fearing its
pitfalls, and made willing to abandon the government-issued currencies with
which they were raised. That’s no simple task.


Cryptocurrencies promise to dispel much of the enormous cost that a bank-centric
model of payments imposes on our global economy; they could bring billions of
people excluded from that system into the global economy; and via multiple
blockchain-based applications, they promise to hold whole classes of middlemen,
centralized institutions, and government agencies accountable as never before.


Nobody knows which direction cryptocurrencies will travel, but smart people,
smarter people than us, make it their business to try to figure out which path
these things will take.


We have stressed all along that the underlying technology presented by bitcoin’s
blockchain matters far more than the specific currency that bears its name.


Cryptocurrency’s future has a binary aspect: if it fails, nothing happens; if it
succeeds, it’s a game-changer. If and when the game changes, so much else about
the structure of the world changes as well.


The decentralized bitcoin network and its public ledger, the blockchain, are at
their essence a radical new way of dealing with information. In this case, it
takes information about monetary transactions and economic exchanges out of the
hands of monopolist institutions and creates a decentralized mechanism for
society to judge the validity of that information. Thus cryptocurrency can claim
to be the latest in a long line of technological developments that have shifted
power out of the hands of centralized elites and handed it over to the people.

[amzn:1784700738]

