From the Ruins of Empire: The Revolt Against the West and the Remaking of Asia
==============================================================================
![](/bookimg/fromruinsofempire.jpg)

Europeans would like to escape from their history, a ‘great’ history written in
letters of blood. But others, by the hundreds of millions, are taking it up for
the first time, or coming back to it (Raymond Aron, 1969).


The contemporary world first began to assume its decisive shape over two days in
May 1905 when a small Japanese fleet commanded by Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō
annihilated much of the Russian navy.


For the first time since the Middle Ages, a non-European country had vanquished
a European power in a major war; and the news careened around a world.


For many other non-white peoples, Russia’s humiliation seemed to negate the
West’s racial hierarchies, mocking the European presumption to ‘civilize’ the
supposedly ‘backward’ countries of Asia.


Students from Muslim countries everywhere now headed to Tokyo to learn the
secrets of its progress. The domino effect of Japan’s victory was felt even in
the Indonesian archipelago which had only recently been unified by Dutch
colonialists.


The most far-reaching changes occurred in China, culminating in the overthrow of
one of the world’s oldest imperial dynasties in 1911.


Elsewhere, too, Japan’s victory galvanized patriotic sentiment and even pushed
it towards extremism.


The slaughter of the First World War, a decade after the Battle of Tsushima,
would deprive Europe, in Asian eyes, of much of its remaining moral prestige.


From its zenith at the beginning of the twentieth century, Europe’s hold over
Asia would dramatically weaken; by 1950, with India and China already sovereign
states, Europe would be reduced to a peripheral presence in Asia, shored up only
by the newest Western power, the United States, and increasingly dependent on an
informal empire constituted by military bases, economic pressures and political
coups.


They had failed to notice the intense desire for equality and dignity among
peoples whom Europe’s most influential thinkers, from Hegel and Marx to John
Stuart Mill, had deemed unfit for self-rule – thinkers whose ideas, ironically,
would in fact prove highly potent among these ‘subject peoples’.


The central event of the last century for the majority of the world’s population
was the intellectual and political awakening of Asia and its emergence from the
ruins of both Asian and European empires. To acknowledge this is to understand
the world not only as it exists today, but also how it is continuing to be
remade.


The European subordination of Asia was not merely economic and political and
military. It was also intellectual and moral and spiritual: a completely
different kind of conquest than had been witnessed before, which left its
victims resentful but also envious of their conquerors and, ultimately, eager to
be initiated into the mysteries of their seemingly near-magical power.


Jamal al-Din al-Afghani is revered as the intellectual godfather of the Islamic
Revolution, which Michel Foucault, visiting Tehran in 1979, called ‘the first
great insurrection’ against the ‘global systems’ of the West.


Compared to the two other great political and philosophical exiles of the
nineteenth century, Karl Marx and Alexander Herzen, al-Afghani is barely known
in the West today, even though his influence exceeds that of Herzen and, at
least in its longevity, almost matches Marx’s.


Certainly, there was scarcely a social or political tendency in Muslim lands –
modernism, nationalism, pan-Islamism – that al-Afghani’s catholic and vital
sensibility did not either ignite or stoke. Nor was there a realm of political
action – anti-imperialist conspiracy, education, journalism, constitutional
reform – on which he did not leave the imprint of his ideas.


Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt had first demonstrated to many Muslims that some
people of the West had discovered new sources of economic and military power,
and could project it thousands of miles away from home.


They did not yet fear Europe as a profoundly disruptive force, one that would
challenge Muslims’ most strongly held conceptions about their place in the
world.


Remarkably, al-Afghani was already alert to the perils ahead for Muslim
countries in the 1860s, when the European presence in Asia was still largely
confined to India. He realized that history was working independently of the God
of the Koran, and that the initiative had been seized by the restless, energetic
peoples in the West who, erupting out of longstanding cultural and political
backwaters, were discovering and exploring new worlds and subjugating with means
never wielded in previous imperial expansions, Muslim as well as other
non-Western peoples.


By late 1869, when al-Afghani arrived there, Istanbul was the largest city in
the Muslim world and the political centre of both Arabs and Persians.
[\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:1027)


Europeans attracted by the possibility of easy money had poured into the city
after 1838, when the Ottomans signed a free-trade agreement with Britain and
loosened their control of the economy.


In 1867 Sultan Abdulaziz had returned from a grand tour of Paris, London and
Vienna with big plans to make Istanbul appear more European. In 1869, the Prince
of Wales visited the city.


European banks mushroomed, offering loans at extortionate interest rates. As the
Ottomans sank steadily into debt, European power inexorably grew.


Capitulations made Europeans immune to litigation or trial in Muslim courts, no
matter how severe their crime.


In Ottoman Turkey the dominion of the West was achieved not through outright
conquest, as had happened in India, but through urgent borrowings of political,
economic and cultural ideas from Europe.


‘Islam was for centuries, in its setting, a marvellous instrument of progress.
Today it is a clock which has lost time and which must be made to catch up.’


The Ottoman desire to be part of the Concert of Europe, echoed today by the
Turkish application to join the European Union, was fulfilled at the end of the
war by the Treaty of Paris of 1856.


So disruptive was the overall effect that in 1876 Sultan Abdulhamid would
himself join the growing popular reaction against Westernization, and turn to
pan-Islamism as a bulwark against Western encroachments upon the Muslim world.


Clearly, the lessons from Afghanistan and India were crystallizing in
al-Afghani’s mind – mainly that Muslims could not return to the glorious
imperial past. They had to look ahead and to catch up with the West; and it
wasn’t enough to confine the necessary modernization to the army, as the
Ottomans and the Egyptians were then doing.


As al-Afghani saw it, a much greater transformation – primarily in the mind –
was needed.


Despite the setbacks, al-Afghani was learning how to make his views acceptable
to a broader constituency than the ruling classes in Muslim countries.


Like the Young Ottomans, al-Afghani knew how to speak of new ideas and
possibilities in the idiom of Islam, and make reform acceptable, even
attractive, as a step to political independence and unity.


Until the revolts of the 1870s, British officials counted on the possibility
that the Egyptian peasant was so beaten down that ‘no amount of misery or
oppression would provoke him to resistance’.


More vividly than Ottoman Turkey, Egypt had revealed the severe limitations and
problems of modernization within an international capitalist economy where the
rules were made by European imperialists.


When Crown Prince Tawfiq became khedive in June 1879, al-Afghani sent his
congratulations and urged the new ruler of Egypt to expel foreigners from the
government.


These speeches were always likely to get al-Afghani into trouble; and European
consuls had been tracking him for some time.


Arrested in Cairo, al-Afghani was denied food for two days in Suez, and his few
possessions were taken from him by the police before he was expelled to India.


That same year, the British ferociously bombarded Alexandria and began their
long occupation of Egypt.


In the late 1870s, while he was still in Egypt, al-Afghani wrote to Sultan
Abdulhamid describing his pain and outrage over the humiliation of Muslim
countries by Western powers.


He would now advocate nationalisms, religious-based rather than ethnic or
secular, in different Muslim countries, and would also deploy such potent
invocations as pan-Islamism and holy war.


In the last quarter of the nineteenth century the tone was changing all across
the Muslim world as it took stock of its own helplessness against an
increasingly aggressive West.


Modernization, it was clear, hadn’t secured the Ottomans against infidels; on
the contrary, it had made them more dependent. Nor had it saved Egypt from
buckling to British pressure – indeed, its globalized economy had made Egypt a
subservient client state.


The idea of a strong Caliph bubbled up in such far-off places as India and
Indonesia, where Muslims considered themselves oppressed by Europeans and
hankered for their own universal civilization.


Reform had run its course; the dalliance with Europe’s values was over. It was
the turn of Islam to serve as a ruling ideology.


Very quickly, Muslims around the world embraced the idea that what could now
save Islam was a strengthened pan-Islam centred in Istanbul, with the only
surviving great Muslim power, the Ottoman sultan, as the caliph or khalifa.


After a brief stopover in London,al-Afghani arrived in Paris in January 1883,
shortly after Britain had suppressed the uprising in Egypt and occupied the
country.


A few months later Abduh joined him in Paris and together they founded a secret
society of Muslims dedicated to the unification and reform of Islam.


Al-Afghani and Abduh started a magazine called al-‘Urwa al-wuthqa (literally,
‘The Firmest Bond’) for free distribution in the Muslim world.


It is hard to underestimate its importance as the first international periodical
to call explicitly for the revival of Islamic solidarity in the face of the
encroaching West. Nothing like it had ever existed in Arabic, or in any of the
other languages of the Islamic world.


It would spread al-Afghani’s reputation deep into Central Asia and further east
to the Muslims of China and the Malay Peninsula.


In 1886, he travelled to Persia,he was a famous man by then.
[\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:1821)


Al-Afghani then went on to Moscow. The British were closely monitoring his
movements at this time,‘his object in visiting Russia was to make himself
practically acquainted with a country on which 60,000,000 Indian Muslims place
sole reliance, and which they hope will afford them protection and emancipate
them from the detested English yoke’. [\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:1835)


He confessed he was worried about British influence in Afghanistan; the British,
he said, always crept into countries as advisers before **becoming their
masters.**


Apparently influenced by al-Afghani’s networking in Russia, the shah of Persia
overcame his dislike enough to invite him again to Tehran.


His decision to accept a flattering invitation to counsel the Ottoman Sultan
Abdulhamid 11 and go to Istanbul would effectively remove him from the political
scene he had hoped to alter.


He often returned to his favourite themes. Muslim mimicry of European ways, he
argued, would expose them to European rule: ‘this is an imitation that by its
nature will drag us into admiration for foreigners; and being content with their
domination over us.’


He stressed a clear and modern reading of the Koran; no traditionalist
interpretation of the holy text, he seemed to argue, should stand in the way of
Muslim unity.


Al-Afghani spent a few painful months before dying, still only fifty-nine, on 9
March 1897.


His grave was left unmarked. It would not be disturbed for almost a half
century. During this time, ordinary people rather than despots would eagerly
absorb his ideas. Then, in yet another pendulum swing of fortune usual with
political exiles, he would be famous again, revered by a new generation of
politicized Muslims who had taken to heart his favourite Koranic injunction:
‘God does not change the condition of a people until they change their own
condition.’ [\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:2062)


In the late nineteenth century many Muslims were to develop their sense of a
world out of touch with God, of a glorious history gone terribly wrong, and the
related suspicion that their failure to adhere to a ‘true’ path of Islam was to
blame for their political setbacks. These have since become recurring notes in
the modern history of Muslim countries. It was al-Afghani’s unique achievement
to sense and amplify this predicament more keenly than anyone before him, from
places – the central parts of the Muslim world – where it was most acutely felt.


It is impossible to imagine, for instance, that the recent protests and
revolutions in the Arab world would have been possible without the intellectual
and political foundation laid by al-Afghani’s assimilation of Western ideas and
his rethinking of Muslim traditions.


His Islamic anti-imperialism can be seen now to have inaugurated a tradition of
political activists and revolutionaries that culminated, more than a century
later, in a major assault on the very capital of Western modernity.


The Arab Spring has finally brought popular mass movements to the Middle East.


A measure of the magnitude of al-Afghani’s self-appointed task is that the
problems he dealt with remain as dauntingly intransigent as ever, and their
ramifications now extend not only to the Muslim countries he travelled through
but also to the rest of the world.


In the wake of the First World War and the Paris Peace Conference, many thinkers
and activists in the East began to reconsider their earlier captivation with
Western political ideals. Modernization still seemed absolutely imperative, but
it did not seem the same as Westernization, or to demand a comprehensive
rejection of tradition or an equally complete imitation of the West. Freshly
minted ideologies like revolutionary communism and Islamic fundamentalism, which
promised to sweep away the debris of the past and initiate a fresh beginning,
began to look attractive. And, most fatefully, liberal democracy did not seem
necessary to national self-strengthening.


For many Chinese in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, India was
the prototypical ‘lost’ country, one whose internal weakness, exploited by
foreign invaders, had forced it into a state of subjugation that was morally and
psychologically shameful, as well as politically and economically catastrophic.


Addressing a dinner-party audience in New York in 1930 that included Franklin D.
Roosevelt, Henry Morgenthau and Sinclair Lewis, Tagore had conceded that ‘the
age belongs to the West and humanity must be grateful to you for your science’.
But, he added, ‘you have exploited those who are helpless and humiliated those
who are unfortunate with this gift’. As events in the next decade would prove,
liberation for many Asians would be synonymous with turning the tables and
subjecting their Western masters to extreme humiliation. This extraordinary
reversal would occur more quickly than anyone expected, and more brutally than
Tagore feared. And Japan would be its principal agent.


Speaking to a full house at Carnegie Hall in New York in 1930, Rabindranath
Tagore claimed that Americans ignored Britain’s domination of India, and worried
about Japan only because the latter ‘was able to prove she would make herself as
obnoxious as you can’.


It was his final message to the West, greeted, according to the New York Times,
by ‘considerable laughter and hand-clapping’.


Tagore was, of course, aware that Japan’s ‘obnoxiousness’ was itself a reaction
to the nationalistic and imperialist West and its ‘unreasonableness’.


In about ninety days, beginning on 8 December 1941, Japan overran the
possessions of Britain, the United States and the Netherlands in East and
South-east Asia, taking the Philippines, Singapore, Malaya, Hong Kong, the Dutch
East Indies, much of Siam and French Indochina, and Burma with bewildering
swiftness to stand poised at the borders of India by early 1942. There are few
examples in history of such dramatic humiliation of established powers.


The slow, frustrating efforts of al-Afghani, Liang Qichao and other
first-generation intellectuals and activists across Asia – all those many
periodicals with tiny circulations, and late-night conversations in dingy rooms
– were finally bearing fruit. The Japanese had revealed how deep the roots of
anti-Westernism went, and how quickly Asians could seize power back from their
European tormentors.


After a long and hard struggle, the Japanese were finally ‘punished’, fire-and
nuclear-bombed into submission.


Still, in most countries they occupied, the Japanese deeply undermined the
European power that kept the natives in a permanent state of submission.


Accustomed to deferential natives, European powers mostly underestimated the
post-war nationalism that the Japanese had unwittingly or deliberately
unleashed. They also misjudged their own staying power among populations
unremittingly hostile to them.


Nevertheless, the speed of decolonization was breathtaking.


The comprehensive defeat of the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 brought the most
powerful country in the world – the United States – into Indochina. But this
only bloodily prolonged the inevitable. [\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:4352)


But the last stubborn Western illusion in Asia – the conviction that brute power
would provoke obedience and compliance from the natives – was shattered in 1975
with the disorderly retreat from the roof of the American embassy in Saigon.
[\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:4355)


Crisis convulsed the world of Islam from the moment it was confronted and then
penetrated by the West. The course of history, which white men presumed to
direct, seemed to violate the Muslim sense of a world order shaped exclusively
by God.


No Islamic leader described an entirely secular utopia.Radical atheists like Mao
Zedong had little chance of flourishing in Islamic societies.
[\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:4504)


The revolutions that succeeded in Muslim countries were launched in the name of
Islam not Marx or Paine.


Muslims initially admired Western-style liberalism for having created, at least
in Europe, a humane civilization. But this prestige began to crumble in the last
quarter of the nineteenth century; liberalism was discredited by its apparent
complicity with imperialism.


Among ideologies imported from – and then used against – the West, nationalism
had more purchase, especially as old empires crumbled in the first half of the
twentieth century and the idea of self-determination came into vogue.


Decolonization, and the gradual lessening of Western influence, did not undercut
the power of popular Islam.


The most striking aspect of the Muslim world in the second half of the twentieth
century has been the outbursts, frequently fanatical, of deeply politicized
Islam in both Sunni and Shiite lands.


During this time, [\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:4541) Pakistan’s Jamaat-e-Islami and
Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood moved from the political margins of their societies
to the mainstream. An Islamic Revolution erupted in Iran, and its aftershocks
travelled as far as the Malay Peninsula and Java, transforming politics in these
regions. Three years later, in 1981, an Islamic militant assassinated the
president of Egypt. Within a decade transnational militant groups, often
upholding hard-line Salafi versions of Islam, declared jihad against despotic
Arab regimes in Tunisia, Egypt, Algeria, Syria and Libya. Despite different
political contexts, these Islamist groups had in common an idea of Islam as a
framework for moral reform as well as a revolutionary ideology and an identity.


The West is no longer the source of good as well as bad things, deep in material
benefits but shallow in spiritual matters; it has to be rejected in toto.


But the vast majority of people in Muslim countries never stopped believing in
Islam. They also failed to develop the habit of seeing Islam as a purely
religious phenomenon, separate from economics, politics, law and other aspects
of collective life.


It is largely due to the Islamic Revolution in Iran that today the basic
principles of the first Muslim Westernized elites – that development entails the
rejection of Islamic values in favour of Western ones – lie discredited from
Tunisia to Xinjiang, and that Islam continues to serve as a focal point of
resistance to authoritarian regimes in the Muslim world.


The appalling story of Afghanistan’s destruction is better known. The subsequent
backlash from radical Islamists was supported by the United States, and turned,
with the help of Pakistan’s Islamist dictator General Zia-ul-Haq and Saudi
Arabia, into the first global jihad in Islam’s long history. Wherever there were
Muslims, Saudi petrodollars underwrote Wahhabist mosques, madrasas and clerics.
Victory against Soviet Communism – a godless ideology of the amoral West –
emboldened radical Islamists, and expanded their anti-Western agenda.


It was the experience of training and fighting together during the decade-long
anti-Soviet jihad in Afghanistan that bound the Islamists together into an
international community. It defined their enemy more clearly than before – the
materialist and imperialist civilization of the West in which both communists
and capitalists were complicit – and stoked their fantasy of a global caliphate.


Unwittingly parodying many earlier Western interventions in Asia, in 2002 the
Bush administration pledged to bring ‘democracy, development, free markets and
free trade to every corner of the world’, a mission that, informed by neither
history nor irony, soon met with fierce local resistance and universal
opprobrium. In particular, the Anglo-American invasion of Iraq in 2003, which
caused the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people, radicalized Muslims across
a vast swathe of territory.


By evolving into a strong modern nation, Turkey seems to have been the exception
to the main trends of extremism and chaos in the Muslim world.


The central figure was an army officer, Mustafa Kemal ‘Atatürk’, the hero of
Turkish resistance to the European powers during and after the First World
War.Atatürk saw modernization as synonymous with wholesale secularization and
Westernization, and he went to absurd lengths.


Not surprisingly Atatürk,had many fervent admirers among modernizers in the
Muslim world: Nasser, the shah of Iran, Jinnah and Sukarno were among those who
wanted to imitate him.


But this conventional Western view, in which Turkey quickly ascends to modernity
after cutting the Gordian knot of Islam, suppresses a lot of inconvenient facts.


The great mass of Turkey’s population, mostly peasants concentrated in Anatolia,
did not reject Islam.


The military regimes that periodically ruled the country after 1961 made more
concessions to the essentially Islamic nature of Turkey’s population, especially
after the military coup of 1980.


This development is often feared and scorned in the West as the
‘re-Islamization’ of Turkey.


It tends to be devout, inclined to embrace Islamic symbols banned by Atatürk
(such as the headscarf), while remaining a participant in the global economy in
which Turkey is a major figure.


For Muslims elsewhere, Turkey’s success confirms the validity of an ‘Islamic’
solution to the problem of adapting to Western modernity, and the geopolitical
implications of this unique achievement are immense.


But Turkey, like Meiji Japan before it, may have finally come up against an
explicitly racially motivated disinclination in the West against granting it
full membership to their club. As its efforts to join the European Union are
rebuffed, and anti-Muslim-immigrant sentiment rises in Europe, Turks have begun
to wonder whether, although a modernized Islam seems to have adjusted itself to
the West, the West may still be reluctant to include Islam in its
self-perceptions.


Turkey itself shows that Atatürk’s political and cultural experiment succeeded
only partially and that some selective borrowings from Western modernity cannot
relegate Islam to the private sphere – let alone ensure social and economic
justice for the majority of the population.


The pressures on China in the early twentieth century made it imperative to form
a strong nation-state or perish. In this, it succeeded beyond the wildest dreams
of its founders, and, as in Turkey, the selective repudiation of the past and
the appropriation of Western ideologies like secular nationalism and communism
were crucial.


Nothing revealed British weakness in Chinese eyes (and gladdened Chinese hearts)
more than a widely distributed picture of Mrs Thatcher emerging from a blunt
talking-to by Deng Xiaoping and then stumbling on the steps of Beijing’s Great
Hall of the People and ending up on her knees.


Mao’s stress on rural mobilization was opposed by doctrinaire Marxists within
his own party. Eventually, however, through a series of agrarian revolutions –
land redistribution, local government by peasants – the Communists under Mao
welded Chinese peasants into a revolutionary army, and made their victory in
1949 possible.


Together with Soviet and Korean communist forces, China fought the United States
to a stalemate in Korea by 1953 at the cost of nearly half a million Chinese
dead.


Wanting China to catch up with the West as quickly as possible, Mao Zedong set
fantasy targets: he asked his compatriots in the mid-1950s, for instance, to
match Britain’s industrial production in fifteen years.


It was the death of Mao in 1976 that enabled a fresh beginning on principles
that eemed to owe less to orthodox communism than to Mencius’s economic ideals
of public ownership combined with free trade.


In retrospect, communism in China seems more and more to have been an effective
ideology for mobilizing and unifying the Chinese masses.


This is partly why, though communism led to a calamitous misinterpretation of
Chinese realities and has lost its intellectual appeal, the Chinese Communist
Party seems in little danger of going the way of its East European and Russian
counterparts.


In less than six decades, history seems to have fulfilled Mao’s hopes.


White changed the world for ever, subjecting its great diversity to their own
singular outlook and in the process reducing potentially rich encounters with
other peoples and countries to monologues about the unassailable superiority of
modern Western politics, economy and culture.


Successfully exporting its ideas to the remotest corners of the world, the West
also destroyed native self-confidence, causing a political, economic and social
desolation that can perhaps never be relieved by modernity alone.


It is no exaggeration to say that millions, probably hundreds of millions of
people in societies who have grown up with a history of subjection to Europe and
America – the Chinese software engineer and the Turkish tycoon, as well as the
unemployed Egyptian graduate – derive profound gratification from the prospect
of humiliating their former masters and overlords, who appear uncompromisingly
wedded to their right to dictate events around the world.


The images from Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib, the deep Western financial
crisis, and the brutal but inept military actions in Afghanistan and Pakistan
all sustain a powerful sense of Western hypocrisy, failure and retrenchment.


The historical resentments and frustrations of non-Western societies have long
been central to Asia’s political life in which memories of past religious and
political grandeur despoiled by European imperialists still have not faded.


These different national subjectivities now combine to remake the modern world;
it is impossible to ignore them.


Blighted by the calamitous ‘war on terror’, it has been profoundly discredited
by the collapse of the ‘Washington Consensus’, the West’s vaunted model of
unregulated financial capitalism.


This can be seen most clearly today within Europe and the United States, the
originators of globalization. Inequality and unemployment grow as highly mobile
corporations continually move around the world in search of cheap labour and
high profits, evading taxation and therefore draining much-needed investment in
welfare systems for ageing populations.


China, in particular, poses a formidable challenge to the West, and a much
greater one than that presented by radical Islamists who mostly embody the rage
of permanent losers in the international economic system.


The long revolt against the West that began in the late nineteenth century seems
to be approaching a historical watershed. Certainly, the dominance of the West
already appears just another, surprisingly short-lived phase in the long history
of empires and civilizations.


The rise of Asia, and the assertiveness of Asian peoples, consummates their
revolt against the West that began more than a century ago; it is in many ways
the revenge of the East.


Yet this success conceals an immense intellectual failure, one that has profound
ramifications for the world today and the near future. It is simply this: no
convincingly universalist response exists today to Western ideas of politics and
economy, even though these seem increasingly febrile and dangerously unsuitable
in large parts of the world.


The ‘Washington Consensus’ may lie in tatters, and Beijing’s Communist regime
mocks – simply by persisting as long as it has – Western claims of victory in
the Cold War and the inevitability of liberal democracy. But the ‘Beijing
Consensus’ has even less universal application than its Washington counterpart;
it sounds suspiciously like merely a cynical economic argument for the lack of
political freedom.


Furthermore, the nation-state is fundamentally unable to deal on its own with
such problems as climate change, environmental degradation and water scarcity,
which spill across national borders.


Europe’s own transition to its present state of stability and affluence was more
than just painful. It involved imperial conquests, ethnic cleansing and many
minor and two major wars involving the murder and displacement of countless
millions.


The hope that fuels the pursuit of endless economic growth – that billions of
consumers in India and China will one day enjoy the lifestyles of Europeans and
Americans – is as absurd and dangerous a fantasy as anything dreamt up by
al-Qaeda.


It condemns the global environment to early destruction, and looks set to create
reservoirs of nihilistic rage and disappointment among hundreds of millions of
have-nots – the bitter outcome of the universal triumph of Western modernity,
which turns the revenge of the East into something darkly ambiguous, and all its
victories truly Pyrrhic.


 [\*](#ASIN:B008AUGJ02;LOC:1246)

[amzn:B008AUGJ02]

