Historical Capitalism: With Capitalist Civilization
===================================================
What distinguishes the historical social system we are calling historical
capitalism is that in this historical system capital came to be used (invested)
in a very special way. It came to be used with the primary objective or intent
of self-expansion.

Historical capitalism involved therefore the widespread commodification of
processes that had previously been conducted other than via a ‘market’.

The historical development of capitalism has involved the thrust towards the
commodification of everything.

The economics of capitalism has thus been governed by the rational intent to
maximize accumulation. But what was rational for the entrepreneurs was not
necessarily rational for the workers.

Historical capitalism did in fact breed a homo economicus, but he was almost
inevitably a bit confused.

Historical capitalism, is, thus, that locus of productive activities within
which the endless accumulation of capital has been the economic objective

My own view is that the genesis of this historical system is located in
late-fifteenth-century Europe, that the system expanded in space over time to
cover the entire globe by the late nineteenth century, and that it still today
covers the entire globe.

The producer seeking to accumulate is concerned with two different aspects of
labour-power: its availability and its cost.

A group of persons existed who were permanently available for employment, more
or less to the highest bidder.

We refer to the persons who sell their labour as proletarians.

In historical capitalism, there has been increasing proletarianization of the
work-force.

Under historical capitalism there has been a steady devaluation of the work of
women and a corresponding emphasis on the value of the adult male’s work.

The adult male wage-earner was classified as the ‘breadwinner’, and the adult
female home-worker as the ‘housewife.’

Thus was sexism institutionalized.

We must rid ourselves of the simplistic image that the ‘market’ is a place where
initial producer and ultimate consumer meet.

In historical capitalism, such market-place transactions have constituted a
small percentage of the whole. Most commodity chains have not been random in
their geographical directions. They have tended to move from the peripheries of
the capitalist world-economy to the centres or cores.

The key to hiding this central mechanism lay in the very structure of the
capitalist world-economy, the seeming separation in the capitalist world-system
of the economic arena and the political arena.

Thus did historical capitalism actually create the so-called historical levels
of wages which have become so dramatically divergent in different zones of the
world-system.

We have spent much time on delineating how historical capitalism has operated in
the narrowly economic arena. We are now ready to explain why capitalism emerged
as a historical social system.

So imbued are we all by the self-justifying ideology of progress which this
historical system has fashioned, that we find it difficult even to recognize the
vast historical negatives of this system.

We can see by comparing the Europe of 1650 with 1450 that the following things
had occurred. By 1650, the basic structures of historical capitalism as a viable
social system had been established and consolidated.

Furthermore, if one substituted 1900 for 1650, one would find that most of the
comparisons with 1450 still hold true.

It is only in the twentieth century that we shall see that the historical system
of capitalism has, after four to five hundred years of flourishing, finally come
into structural crisis.

The creation of historical capitalism as a social system dramatically reversed a
trend that the upper strata feared, and established in its place one that served
their interests even better.

It is thus no accident that the control of state power, the conquest of state
power if necessary, has been the central strategic objective of all the major
actors in the political arena throughout the history of modern capitalism.

The fact that frontier changes have had immediate impacts on the patterns of the
social division of labour in the world-economy has been central to the
considerations of all those who favoured or opposed particular frontier changes.

The second element of state power of fundamental concern to the operations of
historical capitalism was the legal right of states to determine the rules
governing the social relations of production within their territorial
jurisdiction.

All these state decisions were taken with direct reference to the economic
implications for the accumulation of capital.

In short, the power to tax was one of the most immediate ways in which the state
directly assisted the process of the accumulation of capital in favour of some
groups rather than others.

The structural base of the economic system and the clearly-perceived interests
of the major accumulators of capital were fundamentally opposed to a
transformation of the world-economy into a world-empire.

These considerations formed the objective basis of the so-called balance of
power, so that no single state could successfully conquer all the others.

Entrepreneur against entrepreneur, economic sector against economic sector, the
entrepreneurs located in one state, or ethnic group, against those in
another—the struggle has been by definition ceaseless. And this ceaseless
struggle has constantly taken a political form, precisely because of the central
role of the states in the accumulation of capital.

‘democracy’ or ‘liberty’ against ‘feudalism’ or ‘tradition’ have not been
struggles of the working classes against capitalism, they have been essentially
struggles among the accumulators of capital for the accumulation of capital.

Once that is remembered, one is able to make a great deal of sense out of the
political history of the modern world.

Historical capitalism has operated within a world-economy but not within a
world-state. Quite the contrary.

The political consequence internally has been the continued exploitation of the
labour-force, if in a reduced and ameliorated form in many instances.

Changes in state structures have altered the politics of accumulation; they have
not yet been able to end them.

Historical capitalism has involved a monumental creation of material goods, but
also a monumental polarization of reward. Many have benefited enormously, but
many more have known a substantial reduction in their real total incomes and in
the quality of their lives.

But over the whole of the time-space zone encompassed by historical capitalism,
the endless accumulation of capital has meant the incessant widening of the real
gap.

Racism has thus been a cultural pillar of historical capitalism. Its
intellectual vacuity has not prevented it from unleashing terrible cruelties.

Historical capitalism entered into its structural crisis in the early twentieth
century and will probably see its demise as a historical system sometime in the
next century. What will follow is hazardous to predict.

The crisis of historical capitalism is often spoken of as the transition from
capitalism to socialism.

We do not know yet how a socialist world order would operate.

Existing states or movements which call themselves socialist are phenomena of
the present, that is of the historical capitalist world-system, and must be
evaluated within that framework.

But the future world order will construct itself slowly, in ways we can barely
imagine, never mind predict

The Marxist embrace of an evolutionary model of progress has been an enormous
trap, which socialists have begun to suspect only recently

The few crumbs that have existed in historical capitalism for the working
classes have always been concentrated in core areas. This is still
disproportionately true.

The real danger occurs precisely now, as historical capitalism approaches its
most complete unfolding—the further extension of the commodification of
everything,

At the very most, 5 to 10 per cent of the world’s population can engage even
once in a tourist expedition.

Faith in science reflects the confidence in the endlessly expanding
possibilities of capitalist accumulation.

Human rights are precisely not a universal value but a reward of privilege.

The world of capitalist civilization is a polarized and a polarizing world.

What has preserved the system thus far has been the hope of incremental
reformism, the eventual bridging of the gap.

Capitalist civilization has reached the autumn of its existence.

The modern world-system as such is approaching, is probably already in, a
systemic crisis

We can be sure some new historical order will emerge. We cannot be sure what
that order will be.

We are thus moving into a time of massive local, regional, and world disorders,
a time of troubles, which will be far less structured (and therefore far less
contained) than the German-US world wars of the twentieth century and the wars
of national liberation that came in their wake.

Where shall we come out? For out of chaos comes new order. We cannot know for
certain, except for one thing. Capitalist civilization will be over; its
particular historical system will be no more.

It will not be the end of history, but in a real sense its beginning.

The human social world is still very young in cosmological time.

[amzn:1844677664]

