A History of 20th Century Britain (2007)
========================================

By **Andrew Marr**

Consumerism has shouldered aside other ways of understanding the world – real
political visions, organised religion,   a pulsing sense of national identity.
So an obvious question is whether the triumph of consumerism, that big story
of British life from 1945 until today, is about to be halted.


The most fundamental thing the war changed was the political climate: it made
democracy fashionable.


If the government could throw an army into Europe and defeat the most well
organised and frightening-looking military   machine of modern times, then what
else could it do? Was all the waste and lack of planning and general amateurism
really the best the British could   achieve?


As early as 1940 the great wartime Archbishop of Canterbury, William Temple, had
called for ‘extreme inequalities of   wealth to be abolished’. Going rather
further, his Council of Clergy and Ministers for Common Ownership declared
private ownership of industry ‘contrary to Divine Justice.


Britain’s dilemma from 1945 until today has been easy to state, impossible to
resolve. How do you maintain   independence and dignity when you are junior
partner, locked into defence systems, intelligence gathering and   treaties with
the world’s great military giant?


The post-war Labour government did the following things. It created the National
Health Service. It brought in   welfare payments and state insurance ‘from the
cradle to the grave’. It nationalized the Bank of England, the coal   industry,
which was then responsible for 90 per cent of Britain’s energy needs, and
eventually the iron and steel   industry too. It withdrew from India. It
demobilized much of the vast army, air force and navy that had been
accumulated during the war. It directed armament factories back to peaceful
purposes and built new homes, though not   nearly enough. It oversaw a
rationalisation and shake-up in the school system, raising the leaving age to
fifteen.   It kept the people fed, though, as we have seen, not excitingly fed.
It started to fight Communism in Korea and to   develop the atomic bomb. It did
these things against the background of the worst financial crisis that could be
imagined, at a time when its own civil servants were drawing up plans for
starvation rationing if the money ran out,   and while meeting its obligations
to the malnourished people of other countries, left bereft by war or crop
failure.   It harangued people to work harder and consume less. In its dying
months it did its best to amuse and entertain them   too, with the Festival of
Britain. This combines to form the most dramatic tale in our peacetime history
of a State   organisation doing things it actually meant to.


If there was one single domestic good that the British took from the sacrifices
of the war, it was a health service   free at the point of use. We have clung to
it tenaciously ever since and no mainstream party has dared suggest   taking it
away (remember published 2007!).


Aside from military historians, Korea has become the forgotten war. Yet it was a
genuinely dangerous global   confrontation in which Britain played an important
if subsidiary role. It was the first and only time when British   troops have
directly fought a major Communist army, Mao’s Chinese People’s Liberation Army;
and it was a long and   bloody conflict. Britain and her Commonwealth allies,
fighting with a mixture of professional soldiers and young   National Service
conscripts, lost more than a thousand dead and nearly three times as many
wounded. The overall UN   casualties were around 142,000.


As they struggled against a peasant army across icy, rocky hills and through
paddy-fields the US military   contemplated using their new atomic bombs to lay
down an irradiated dead zone between Korea and China.


In a memorandum to Attlee’s government, the British chiefs of staff wrote with
elegant understatement that ‘from the   military point of view . . . the
dropping of an atomic bomb in North Korea would be unsound. The effects of such
action would be world-wide, and might well be very damaging. Moreover, it would
probably provoke a global war.’


Though the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 is remembered, rightly, as the moment
when the world came nearest to nuclear   war, there was a serious possibility of
it happening earlier, in Korea and China.


In some ways, Korea can be compared to the Iraq wars, the first of which had UN
backing, and both of which were   American wars in which Britain played a
secondary role.


The Cold War shaped post-war Europe. In Britain it helped quickly blight the
sunny optimism about a better future   that so briefly bloomed in the years
after the war.


By the end of this period, in 1963, there were still nearly a quarter of a
million people in ‘domestic service’ –   maids, housekeepers, valets – and more
than six hundred full-time butlers. Britain was still graced with thirty-one
Dukes, thirty-eight Marquesses and a mere 204 Earls.


People were more or less obedient citizens and subjects, not picky consumers.
Patriotism was proclaimed publicly,   loudly and unselfconsciously, in a way
that would quickly become hard to imagine.


Knowing what we know now, there were signs of social change everywhere from the
disaffected teenagers just beginning   to be discussed, to the rise of Maltese,
Italian and home-grown crime dynasties, and the first wide-eyed, optimistic
Caribbean immigrants. There was also much boredom and frustration. Working-class
Britain was getting richer, but   still housed in dreadful old homes, excluded
from higher education, unless part of a small and lucky elite, and   deprived of
any jobs but hard and boring ones. Eventually, the lid would blow off. Yet to be
British was something   to be proud of.


Politics in the fifties, at least on the Tory side, was unimaginably different
from politics today. There were the   same rackety campaigning offices, the same
ambitious young researchers dreaming of becoming ministers themselves and   the
same underlying ruthless struggle for personal power. But many more people were
party members, the backbench MPs   were more independent-minded, with more
status in the country, yet far lazier, too; and above all, the top of
government was small social circle, which operated well out of the way of
lenses, microphones or diarists.


Astonishingly, within months of his becoming Prime Minister, Macmillan was
leading a government in which thirty-five   ministers out of eighty-five,
including seven in the cabinet, were related to him by marriage.


The private thinking of Whitehall was laid out in a fascinating memo from top
officials to a cabinet committee   shortly after the Americans had upped the
ante in the nuclear race by exploding their first H-bombs. The British   cabinet
paper was frank about the overall position: ‘It is clear that ever since the end
of the war we have tried to   do too much – with the result that we have only
rarely been free from the danger of economic crisis.


Suez is often seen as a very short era of bad judgement, a crisis whose origins
are obscure and whose consequences   are hard to discern. This sells it short.
Suez was about Britain’s colonial history.


The biggest single difference between the Suez and Iraq crises was, of course,
that the Americans did not want war in   and were determined for it in 2003.


Much later, according to the then Vice President, Richard Nixon, Eisenhower had
second thoughts about Suez, calling   his decision to crush Britain his greatest
foreign policy mistake. Dulles, who was desperately ill with cancer, told   the
head of the hospital where he died in 1959 that he reckoned he had been wrong
over Suez too.


‘Suez’ became four-letter shorthand for the moment when Britain realised her new
place in the world.


A year after Macmillan’s triumphant re-election, he made a speech unlikely to be
forgotten. No single speech made   more of an impact in seeming to settle the
argument than the one Harold Macmillan made in Cape Town in 1960, known
forever as his ‘wind of change’ speech. He told his startled audience; ‘the wind
of change is blowing through this   continent’ and like it or not, this was
simply a fact.


Did the British scuttle from Africa happen too fast, in a mood of political
hysteria and without proper thought for   what would follow? The sheer speed may
not be as admirable as we have been taught to think.


Only after Macmillan’s stunning 1959 general election victory did pressure
really begin to build up for some kind of   restriction on immigration to
Britain. Opinion polls were now showing strong hostility to the open-door
policy.


‘Immigration was restricted a full four years after all measures of the public
mood indicated clear hostility to a   black presence in Britain, and even then
it was only done with hesitation.’44 And when the 1962 Commonwealth   Immigrants
Act finally passed into law, it was notably liberal, at least by later
standards, assuming the arrival of   up to 40,000 legal immigrants a year with
complete right of entry for their dependants.


In the three-year period from 1960 to 1963, despite the intense hostility to
immigration, ‘more migrants had arrived   in Britain than had disembarked in the
whole of the twentieth century up to that point. The country would never be
the same again.’


In 1962 the world had come to the brink of nuclear war during the Cuban missile
crisis.


In 1955 secret government papers on the impact of hydrogen bombs stated that the
effect ‘on dense populations would   remain beyond the imagination until it
happened. Whether this country could withstand an all-out attack and still be
in any state to carry on hostilities must be very doubtful.’


Macmillan had his post-nuclear government system ready. Whitehall had earmarked
210 people who would run the remnant   of a country, from chiefs of staff and
intelligence officers to typists and clerks. They would be rushed to
TURNSTILE, the top-secret underground bunker system with sixty miles of tunnels,
built deep under the Cotswolds at   Corsham. Everyone else, including the wives,
husbands and children of those ordered to the bunkers, would have been   left to
burn, die of radiation poisoning, or otherwise expire.


It is striking that the original clinching argument for British nuclear weapons,
which was that they would give   Britain’s politicians special status and
leverage to influence Washington, so quickly collapsed. And it is even more
striking that when the argument collapsed there was no radical rethinking of
Britain’s nuclear posture


Labour never went anti-nuclear, even though so many of its supporters were so
passionately committed to CND


By the 1960s, the flow of lower-middle-class and working-class children through
grammar schools and into the   universities was strongly affecting the
atmosphere of the whole country


Despite the new tycoons and the cluster of truly innovative big companies,
Britain’s output was growing far more   slowly than other comparable countries
and her share of world markets was shrivelling at a terrifying speed. Despite
outside shocks, from Indian independence to Suez, from the sterling crises and
the failure of weapons systems, to   France’s rejection of her application for
Common Market membership, the country had made no radical change of   direction.
Privately, civil servants and politicians acknowledged that there were profound
problems, and agonized   about what should be done


No revolution, invasion or wartime defeat had shaken the British as they
acquired their new cars and explored their   new supermarkets; British political
scandals were a branch of light entertainment compared to the darker struggles
convulsing Italy, France or Eastern Europe. And when Britain finally made a
change, it turned out to be a   surprisingly modest and ineffective one.


An alternative assessment came from Crossman as he contemplated the funeral
gathering for Sir Winston Churchill in   Westminster Hall at the end of January
1965: ‘But, oh, what a faded, declining establishment surrounded me. Aged
marshals, grey, dreary ladies, decadent Marlboroughs and Churchills. It was a
dying congregation gathered there and   I am afraid the Labour Cabinet didn’t
look too distinguished, either. It felt like the end of an epoch, possibly
even the end of a nation.’


The thirteen years of Tory rule, wasted according to Harold Wilson, were
followed by fifteen years when modern   Britain rose and failed. ‘Modern’ does
not simply mean the look and shape of the country formed during 1964–79, most
of which is still here around us, essentially unaltered – the motorways and mass
car economy, the concrete   architecture, the rock music, the high street
chains. It also means a belief in planning and management. This was   the time
of practical men, educated in grammar schools, sure of their intelligence,
rolling up their sleeves and   taking no nonsense. They were going to scrap the
old and fusty, whether that meant the huge Victorian railway   network, the
grand Edwardian government palazzos in Whitehall, the historic regiments,
terraced housing, hanging,   theatre censorship, the prohibitions on homosexual
behaviour and abortion, the ancient coinage and the quaint county   names.


Huge comprehensive schools would be more efficient than the maze of selective
and rubbish-dump academies. The many   hundreds of trade unions would resolve
themselves into a few leviathans, known only by their initials. Small
companies would wither and combine and ever-larger corporations would arise in
their place, ruthless and managed on   the latest scientific, American lines.
Britain herself would cease to be a small independent trader and would merge
into the largest corporation then available, the European Community. This was
managerial self-confidence, which   would be smashed to pieces during the
seventies and never recover.


Just seven men dominate the politics of these thirteen years. They are the three
prime ministers, Harold Wilson,   Edward Heath and James Callaghan; two other
Labour politicians so important they stand alongside the premiers, Roy   Jenkins
and Denis Healey; and two who stood increasingly outside the management
consensus, leading attacks on it   from right and left – Enoch Powell, and
Anthony Wedgwood Benn.


Though they had many differences of outlook, in broad terms they could agree
that Marxism destroyed freedom, and that   the discredited liberal free market
brought chaos and unfairness. Heath would denounce ‘the unacceptable face of
capitalism’ and Healey would promise to make the richest in the land ‘howl with
anguish’


In the sixties and seventies, Britain was becoming a more feminized, sexualized,
rebellious and consumption-addicted   society. The political class was cut off
from this by their age.


The cross-looking men with moustaches and short back and sides were losing
ground. But they were visibly still in   power.


Britain had been going through a time of self-doubt, partly because of the seedy
revelations of the Profumo affair   and fears of moral decay among the old
ruling class, but more importantly because of economic decline.


The country needed to sweep away privilege and cobwebbed aristocracy, and
replace it with ruthless and ‘purposive’   modern planning.


The problem Wilson would soon face was how to achieve a successful planned
economy in a capitalist world.


The problem Wilson would soon face was how to achieve a successful planned
economy in a capitalist world.


By 1965 the post-war division of children into potential intellectuals,
technical workers and drones – gold, silver   and lead – was thoroughly
discredited.


For roughly a quarter of children there were the grammar schools, offering
traditional academic teaching, including   much memorizing and strict
discipline. For the other three-quarters of state-educated children there were
the   secondary moderns, frankly second-rate and often in buildings which
reflected their lower status.


In practice there was therefore a sharp, public, sheep-and-goats division of the
country’s children, which took place   at eleven years old through the
‘eleven-plus’ examination. Many of the majority who were rejected and sent to
the   secondary moderns never got over the sense of rejection and failure.


By 1970 when Wilson was defeated, a third of children were at comprehensives and
a mere eight education authorities   were holding on to the old division.


The revolution simply rolled on. Edward Heath, devoted to his old grammar
school, had promised to stop bullying   education authorities into destroying
grammar schools. Crosland’s 10/65 was duly withdrawn, and Heath appointed that
ultimate enthusiast for the grammar schools system, Margaret Thatcher, as
Education Secretary.


As one of her biographers flatly pointed out, ‘for all her strong prejudices
against them . . . Margaret Thatcher   approved more schemes for comprehensive
schools, and the abolition of more grammar schools, than any other Secretary
of State before or since.


Crosland’s legacy went far beyond comprehensives. He was a high spender on
education, as was Margaret Thatcher, both   believing long before Tony Blair
that there was no better way of investing taxes than in ‘education, education,
education.


Perhaps the proudest educational achievement of the Wilson years was the Open
University. It has been one of the most   successful and liberating acts by a
post-war government in education.


The greatest changes of the Labour years were achieved by Roy Jenkins, a man
Wilson had always distrusted.


Back in the Tory years when he was slim and dashing, Roy Jenkins had set out his
case for social reforms, which would   remove the State’s powers over individual
freedoms. He argued that the ‘ghastly apparatus of the gallows’ must go,   as
well as judicial flogging; that the persecution of homosexuals should end, as
Wolfenden had suggested; that the   Lord Chamberlain’s powers to censor stage
plays must also end; that the ‘harsh and archaic’ law forbidding almost   all
abortions should be changed; that the divorce laws, which caused unnecessary
suffering, should be reformed; and   that the immigration laws needed to be made
more civilized. Through the mid-sixties, all these changes happened.   Hanging
went in 1965, before Jenkins became Home Secretary, but there was a softening on
immigration in 1966,   flogging went in 1967, the same year as the
liberalization of abortion law, and the decriminalization of private
homosexual acts between men aged over twenty-one. State censorship of plays
ended in 1968, and the following year,   the divorce laws were liberalized.
Jenkins had also called for changes to the laws on suicide and on alcohol
licensing, and those came later; but it was a formidable drum-roll of
libertarian change, without precedent and   never matched.


Jenkins turns out to be the single most influential politician of the sixties,
though never Prime Minister   himself.


He felt he was at the cutting edge of a war about what it meant to be civilized.
Against him and the reformers were   many clergy, including the Roman Catholic
Church; millions of quietly conservative-minded citizens; and much of the
political Establishment. After supporting the abolition of hanging, and after
refusing to authorize the birching of   a prisoner, he became a hate-figure
among many ordinary policemen as well as for the grassroots of the Tory Party,
something he seemed to regard as an honour. Yet he was not liberal on
everything. He believed that crime would be   cut more effectively by catching
more criminals and getting more guilty verdicts, than by horrific punishments.


The left tended to think people’s private lives should be their own, even if
they made choices traditional Christian   society regarded as immoral; but that
people’s working lives, from how much they earned to where they worked, were
fit for State interference. The right had a reverse view, that the State should
uphold traditional moral codes with   the full rigour of the law, but keep out
of the economy as much as possible.


A fair verdict is that the changes allowed the British to be more openly
themselves, and that while the results are   not always pretty; the apple of
self-knowledge cannot be uneaten again and returned to the tree.


The truth is that we have never really left the sixties. We have simply repeated
them, and that goes for those who   were only born later. Sixties music,
shopping and celebrity culture have been spread far beyond their first makers
and participants, to almost everybody in the land.


As the eighties’ economy revived, the sixties’ basic preoccupations – escapism,
personal fulfilment, and shopping –   returned with full force.


If you weren’t listening in the Cavern Club in the early days, or at the Isle of
Wight when Dylan went electric, if   you never dodged the police horses at
Grosvenor Square, or heard Adrian Mitchell and Allen Ginsberg in the Albert
Hall, or sashayed out of Bazaar with a bright bag of swirly-patterned clothes .
. . then sorry, Babe, you missed it,   and you missed it for ever.


The shift was in what it might mean to be properly human. The old virtues of
stoicism, buttoned lips and obedience   were retreating. Traditions of
submission and obedience, hierarchies of class inherited from medieval
landowning,   industrial capital and imperial administration, began to wobble
and dissolve into something very different, a   society, which was dilute,
porous and mushily self-forgiving. This took place not because bad people
corrupted good   people or, if you are ‘pro-sixties’, because noble
revolutionaries ushered in an age of personal freedom, but   because it suited a
new economic system.


All developed societies lavish attention on a small number of favoured people,
rich, beautiful or talented. What has   changed in recent decades is the scale
of celebrity devotion, this cargo cult of modern Britain. It has elbowed   aside
rival forms in television entertainment, invaded and occupied popular newspapers
and produced racks of   magazines breathlessly following face-lifts, marital
break-ups, boob jobs and births of celebs. All of this   originated in the
mid-sixties.


The raising of footballers and musicians from being tradesmen-servants of the
public to misbehaving gods began then   too.


The sixties introduced mass drug use to Britain as the musical and hippy
enthusiasts promoted it as a social and   personal good. The authorities decided
to destroy the drug culture as a social evil. Both were confounded. Nobody
became wiser or more interesting through using heroin, LSD or dope, and the
battle against drug use has been   entirely lost. The victims began with a
steady stream of performers and hangers-on who died from overdoses or
drugs-related accidents and, more important by far, are the hundreds of
thousands of poorer, less talented children   who followed them after having far
less fun.


While the message of the sixties still lives, other stories can dominate the
newspapers for months on end, even   years, and then are apparently forgotten
almost immediately. Perhaps they are too painful to dwell on. The story of
Rhodesia’s Unilateral Declaration of Independence, or UDI, and of the
short-lived Federation that preceded it,   obsessed four prime ministers in a
row, Macmillan, Douglas-Home, Wilson and Heath. It filled front pages, elbowing
out other contemporary crises such as Vietnam that now bulk vastly bigger in
world history. It caused deep divisions   in both the main parties, with their
leaders condemned as race traitors or betrayers of Africa, according to taste.
It produced bizarre summits on Royal Navy warships, and dramatic confrontations
at the United Nations. It pitched   the young Queen Elizabeth into a
constitutional fight over the hanging of three Africans. Its cast of characters,
Garfield Todd, Roy Welensky, and Sir Humphrey Gibbs, forgotten now, as well as
Ian Smith and Joshua Nkomo, were for   a time household names. But little of
this is recalled in the history of the sixties.


And the final outcome of the Rhodesian crisis, a vicious guerrilla war followed
by the rule of Robert Mugabe, one of   the most incompetent megalomaniacs to
hold power at the beginning of the twenty-first century, was genuinely   tragic.


This was the dilemma that Harold Wilson inherited when he took office in 1964.


By the time Wilson left office in 1970 the Rhodesian dilemma was no nearer to
being solved, and it would continue to   hang over British politics into the
Thatcher years, when the black majority finally won power.


Amid this maelstrom Britain, yet again, was close to bankruptcy. How to get a
grip? Devaluing the pound might have   given the Wilson government and the
country the chance of a fresh start. In a world of fewer and floating
currencies, the importance of devaluation is harder to understand now, but it
was then the single most important   issue facing Wilson.


This was a choice which went beyond economics. Devaluation and world politics
were inextricably linked.


The alternative was to try to keep the global role and borrow from the United
States. This was certainly on offer but   at a large political price. As
President Johnson’s special assistant put it at the time, ‘We want to make very
sure   that the British get into their heads that it makes no sense for us to
rescue the pound in a situation in which   there is no British flag in Vietnam,
and a threatened British thin-out both east of Suez and in Germany . . . a
British Brigade in Vietnam would be worth a billion dollars at the moment of
truth for Sterling.’


Crossman assessed the dilemma shrewdly, noting in January 1965 that Wilson was
committing Britain to defence spending   ‘almost as burdensome – if not more
burdensome – than that to which Ernest Bevin committed us in 1945, and for the
same reason: because of our commitment to the Anglo-American special
relationship and because of our belief that it   is only through the existence
of that relationship that we can survive outside Europe.’


That, according to Barbara Castle, was what George Brown had decided: ‘We’ve got
to turn down their money and pull   out the troops . . . I want them out of East
of Suez. This is the decision we have got to make: break the commitment   to
America . . . I’ve been sickened by what we have had to do to defend America –
what I’ve had to say at the   despatch box.’ Castle interjected: ‘Vietnam?’ and
Brown replied: ‘Yes, Vietnam too.’


Had Britain broken with America during the most testing time in its Vietnamese
agony, the story of the Atlantic   alliance would have taken a very different
turn. We would probably have entered the EEC much earlier and, again   probably,
have played a role closer to that of France in the following decades, less
linked in nuclear defence or   intelligence terms to Washington. What this would
have meant for the British economy’s failing experiment in   continental
corporatism, and for the stability of the anti-Communist world, is impossible to
say.


At the centre of all the difficulties the government faced was the dilemma of
devaluation.


Decade by decade, government by government, the impact of energy policy on
British politics is a constant theme. One   could write a useful political
history, which did not move beyond the dilemmas posed by energy supply. We can
follow   it from the winter of 1947 when the frozen coal stocks blew Attlee off
course, through the oil-related shock of Suez   and the destruction of Eden, to
Heath’s double confrontation with the miners, ending in his defeat in 1974, the
rise   of Scottish nationalism fuelled by North Sea oil, and then the epic
coalfield confrontation between Margaret   Thatcher and Arthur Scargill taking
the story up to today’s arguments about global warming and gas dependency on
government, the impact of energy policy on British politics is a constant theme.
One could write a useful political   history, which did not move beyond the
dilemmas posed by energy supply. We can follow it from the winter of 1947   when
the frozen coal stocks blew Attlee off course, through the oil-related shock of
Suez and the destruction of   Eden, to Heath’s double confrontation with the
miners, ending in his defeat in 1974, the rise of Scottish   nationalism fuelled
by North Sea oil, and then the epic coalfield confrontation between Margaret
Thatcher and Arthur   Scargill taking the story up to today’s arguments about
global warming and gas dependency on Russia.


It had its effect on Harold Wilson too, when the Six-Day War of June 1967
between Israel and Egypt led to an oil   embargo on Britain by Iraq and Kuwait
because of an alleged pro-Israel line from London. The economic effect was
dreadful; the trade figures a national shock.


Wilson was still determined to resist devaluation. When he discovered briefing
papers on the pros and cons had been   prepared by civil servants, he brusquely
ordered them to be collected up and burned.


The left-wing devaluers hoped to turn Labour at last into a proper socialist
government. They preferred to keep   Wilson as leader but would have ditched him
if necessary. The pro-European devaluers would have liked to replace   Wilson
with Roy Jenkins.


Eventually, on the morning of November 1967, the senior economic adviser at the
Treasury, Sir Alec Cairncross, told   Callaghan at a private meeting that the
dance was over. Nothing more could be done, the music had stopped. No   further
foreign borrowing was available. He would have to devalue.


In a 6 p.m. broadcast on 18 November Wilson announced that the pound was being
devalued by 14 per cent and that   defence cuts, restrictions on hire purchase,
or credit, and higher interest rates would follow too.


Wilson was also devalued, possibly by more than 14 per cent.


From then on Labour would become as much a party of Treasury orthodoxy as the
Conservatives. After being one of the   most energetic Home Secretaries of the
twentieth century, Jenkins himself spent a remarkable couple of years as one
of its more successful Chancellors. Though he never made it to Number Ten, in
terms of personal influence, there is   almost a case for renaming the Wilson
years the Jenkins years.


Forty years on, the paranoid atmosphere after only a few years of Wilson’s first
administration is hard to credit,   but there was a rising conviction among some
in business and the media that democracy itself had failed.


There is a lurid little saloon bar of the mind where conspiracy theorists,
mainly on the left, and self-important   fantasists, mainly on the right, gather
and talk. The rest of us should be wary of joining them for a tipple. Yet   the
transition from the discredited old guard of Macmillan-era Britain to the
unwelcomed new cliques of Wilson-era   Britain was a hard time. Wilson was a
genuine outsider so far as the old Establishment was concerned, and he ran a
court of outsiders. The old Tory style of government by clique and clubmen gave
way to government by faction and   feud, a weakness in Labour politics
throughout the party’s history.


Until the end of the decade the sixties had not been particularly strike-prone
compared to the fifties. Strikes   tended to be local, unofficial and quickly
settled.


Wilson had pioneered the matey ‘beer and sandwiches’ approach to dealing with
union leaders (though he found on his   first attempt the sandwiches were too
thinly cut to satisfy union appetites). But he was becoming disillusioned.
That seamen’s strike of 1966 had been a particularly bruising experience. So for
once it was Wilson who took a   stand. He was supported by an unlikely hammer of
the unions, the veteran left-winger Barbara Castle, now made   Secretary for
Employment.


This was a package of measures, which looks gentle by the standards of the laws
which would come later. The leading   trade unionists of the day, once famous
men like Jack Jones and Hugh Scanlon, saw it as an unacceptable return to
legal curbs they had fought for decades to lift. The battle that followed nearly
ended Wilson’s career, and   Castle’s. Their defeat made the Thatcher revolution
inevitable, though it would not come for a further decade.


But had the Labour Government been united behind Wilson on this, then
legislative reform of trade union practices   might have been forced through
even the Parliamentary Labour Party of the day, and much subsequent grief
avoided.   Wilson’s reputation, Labour’s reputation and the story of British
politics would have been markedly different. But   with the cabinet as well as
the backbenches in rebellion, Wilson had no choice but to give way.


The great background question about the Labour governments of the sixties is
whether with a stronger leader they   could have gripped the country’s big
problems and dealt with them. How did it happen that a cabinet of such
brilliant, such clever and self-confident people achieved so little?


Of the great crises that link Wilson and Heath together, that of Northern
Ireland had as much effect on the tenor of   mainland British life as any. It
brought surprise and embarrassment to millions watching the violence on the
streets   of the province.


In the fifties and through most of the sixties, Northern Ireland barely appeared
on the Westminster radar.


Mostly, though, this was a time of dozy neglect which turned out from 1969 to
have been a terrible failure of   imagination – malign neglect, whose effects
would haunt Britain for the next thirty years.


Rising protests about apartheid in South Africa and the struggle for equal
rights in the southern states of the US   had focused attention on the squalid
half-secret on Britain’s doorstep.


In 1967 a civil rights movement had been formed, using the language and tactics
of the Deep South, and the following   year, marches and demonstrations were
being met with police violence.


Bernadette Devlin of the more radical Ulster Unity Party was elected in 1969 to
the Commons, the youngest ever woman   MP, on a civil rights ticket.


Now the nature of the conflict would change. It had begun as a protest about
unfairness, bigotry and political   corruption. It turned into a fight to force
an end to the United Kingdom and to bring about the unification of   Ireland.


This was the crisis inherited by Heath, the nearly man in Irish peace-making, in
1970.


If Heath is associated with a single action, it is British entry into ‘Europe’
but throughout his time in office the   economy, not Europe, was the biggest
issue facing him. British productivity was still pitifully low compared to the
United States or Europe, never mind Japan. The country was spending too much on
new consumer goods and not nearly   enough on modernized and more efficient
factories and businesses.


It is hard to describe quite how heavily, how painfully, relative economic
decline weighed on the necks of   politicians of thirty and forty years ago.


Britain not only had heavy levels of unionization through all the key industries
but also, by modern standards, an   incredible number of different unions – more
than 600 altogether.


Almost immediately, Heath faced a dock strike, followed by a big pay settlement
for local authority dustmen, then a   power workers’ go-slow, which led to power
cuts. Then the postal workers struck. The mood of the government was less
focused and less steely than it would be nine years later when Margaret Thatcher
came to power.


Perhaps the most significant move in the long term was the removal of lending
limits for the high street banks,   producing a vast surge in borrowing.


This, obviously, further fuelled inflation but it also gave a fillip to the
ancient British fetish for house price   ownership and borrowing. The huge
expansion of credit and the unbalanced amount of capital sunk in bricks and
lawns   in modern-day Britain can be traced back partly to this decision, then
the new credit boom of the Thatcher   years.


Heath had worked closely with the Taoiseach (Prime Minister of the Irish
Republic), Jack Lynch, and the new Stormont   leader, Brian Faulkner, who, as a
middle-class businessman by origin, was more in Heath’s image than the Old
Etonian   landowner, Chichester-Clark, had been. Eventually he had even managed
to get the leaders of the Republic and   Northern Ireland to sit and negotiate
at the same table, something that had not happened since Partition in   .


If there was one moment when the ‘troubles’ became unstoppable it was 30 January
1972, ‘Bloody Sunday’, when troops   from the Parachute Regiment killed thirteen
unarmed civilians.


Within a few years, what had been essentially a policing role by the British
Army, separating Protestant bigots from   rebellious Catholics, had become a
full-scale terrorist or counter-insurgency war with all the paranoia, the
kidnappings, the apparatus of repression and the corruption of political life
that it brings.


Then the miners struck. At the beginning of 1972 the National Union of
Mineworkers began their first national strike   since the dark days of the
twenties, pursuing a pay demand of 45 per cent.


Arthur Scargill, a rousing speaker, former Communist Party member and highly
ambitious union activist, later   described the confrontation with Midlands’
police at Saltley as ‘the greatest day of my life’.


Scargill’s greatest day was, for the Prime Minister, ‘the most vivid, direct and
terrifying challenge to the rule of   law that I could ever recall emerging from
within our own country . . . We were facing civil disorder on a massive
scale.’


Heath and his ministers knew that they might have to go directly to the country
with an appeal about who was in   charge but before that, they tried a final
round of compromise and negotiation.


Thatcherites later criticized Heath’s government for doing things, which a
government ought not to do, and not doing   things it ought to.


Heath was blown off course by a political version of the impossible storm that
later wrecked his beloved yacht   Morning Cloud. Much of the country was simply
more left-wing than it was later. The unions, having defeated Wilson   and
Castle, were more self-confident than ever before or since.


What finally finished off the Heath government was the short war between Israel
and Egypt in October 1973, the Yom   Kippur War. Israel’s swift and decisive
victory was a humiliation for the Arab world and it struck back, using oil.
They decided to cut supplies to the West each month until Israel handed back its
territorial gains and allowed the   Palestinians their own state.


It was a global economic shock, shovelling further inflation into the
industrialized world, but in Britain it arrived   with special force. The miners
put in yet another huge pay claim, which would have added half as much again to
many   pay-packets.


When the miners voted, 81 per cent were for striking, including those in some of
the most traditionally moderate   areas in the country. In February 1974 Heath
asked the Queen to dissolve Parliament and went to the country on the   election
platform he had prepared two years earlier: ‘Who governs?’ The country’s answer,
perhaps taking the   question more literally than Heath had hoped, was ‘Not you,
mate.’


Rather fatter, greyer and more personally conservative than he had been ten
years earlier, Harold Wilson was   back.


Contrary to popular myth, the seventies were not all about mass meetings and
walkouts. After Heath had been beaten,   the real trouble did not start again
until 1978–9.


Wilson carried out his promised renegotiation of Britain’s terms of entry to the
EEC and then put the result to the   country in the Benn-inspired 1975
referendum.


In the end, to the simple question, ‘Do you think that the United Kingdom should
stay in the European Community (The   Common Market)?’, 68.3 per cent, or around
17 million people, said ‘Yes’ and 32.8 per cent, some 8.5 million, said   ‘No.


More than thirty years later, the biggest question both about Heath’s triumph in
engineering British membership and   then about the Labour referendum, is
whether the British were told the full story and truly understood the
supranational organization they were signing up to.


Hugo Young, the journalist and historian who studied the campaign in great
detail, wrote: ‘I traced no major document   or speech that said in plain terms
that national sovereignty would be lost, still less one that categorically
promoted the European Community for its single most striking characteristic:
that it was an institution positively   designed to curb the full independence
of the nation-state.’


The truth revealed by opinion polls is that sovereignty, as an issue, did not
concern the public nearly as much as   jobs and food prices. By later standards
the position of Parliament was not taken terribly seriously in public   debates.


As to the rest of Wilson’s short final government, much of his energy was spent
on foreign affairs. Despite American   disapproval the Labour government began
the final withdrawal from east of Suez, giving up any pretensions of British
influence in the Far East. The Empire was formally over.


Perhaps the most important statistic to hold in mind is that between the early
fifties and the mid-seventies, real   disposable income – what people had in
their hand to spend, taking inflation into account – exactly doubled.


The second half of the seventies were the years of deep political disillusion,
strains which seemed to tear at the   unity of the UK: Irish terrorism on the
mainland, a rise in racial tension and widespread industrial mayhem.


Callaghan was by now a familiar and reassuring figure in Britain, tall, ruddy,
no-nonsense, robust and, by comparison   with Wilson, straightforward.


At sixty-five he was one of the most experienced politicians to become Prime
Minister. After Wilson and Heath he was   the third and last of the centrist
seekers after consensus, the wartime avoiders of national confrontation.


Churchill apart, all of his post-war predecessors had been Oxbridge men.
Callaghan had not been to university at   all.


Famously, he told a stunned 1976 Labour conference used to the Keynesian
doctrines about governments spending their   way out of recession, cutting taxes
and boosting investment: ‘I tell you in all candour that that option no longer
exists and that insofar as it ever did exist, it worked by injecting inflation
into the economy . . . Higher   inflation, followed by higher unemployment. That
is the history of the last twenty years.’


Callaghan is forever associated with failure. There is the humiliating,
cap-in-hand begging for help from the   International Monetary Fund, the soaring
inflation and interest rates of the late seventies and finally the piled
rubbish, vast strike meetings and unburied dead of the 1979 ‘winter of
discontent’.


Only after the wasteland of his time in office can the bold remaking of Britain
under Margaret Thatcher begin. And   Callaghan himself had been part of the
problem. His sentimental failure to understand the aggression of the union
challenge to elected power, and his earlier lack of interest in radical economic
ideas, came home to haunt him in   Downing Street.


Finally, on 28 March 1979, the game ended when the government was defeated by a
single vote, brought down at last by   a ragged coalition of Tories, Liberals,
Scottish Nationalists and Ulster Unionists. Callaghan was the first Prime
Minister since 1924 to have to go to Buckingham Palace and ask for a dissolution
of Parliament, because he had lost   a vote in the Commons.


On the Tory side, Thatcher showed a new media savvy, working with the television
news teams and taking the advice of   her advertising gurus, the Saatchis.
Callaghan, who had never expected to win, was soundly beaten. The Conservatives
took sixty-one seats directly from Labour, gaining nearly 43 per cent of the
vote, and a substantial overall   majority, with 339 seats.


The unions would eventually lose almost half their members and any political
influence they briefly enjoyed. More   important than all that, mass
unemployment would arrive in Britain. The one economic medicine so bitter that
no   minister in the seventies had thought of trying it was duly uncorked and
poured into the spoon. It was time for   Britain to grimace and open her mouth.


In politics, if your tactics work and if you are lucky – then you will be
remembered for your principles. Margaret   Thatcher’s tactics did work; she was
shrewd, manipulative and bold, verging on reckless. She was also extremely
lucky. Had Labour not been busy disembowelling itself and had a corrupt,
desperate dictatorship in South America not   taken a nationalistic gamble with
some island sheep-farmers, her government would probably have been destroyed
after   a single term. Had the majority in her cabinet who disagreed with her
about the economy been prepared to say boo to   a goose, she might have been
forced out even before that. In either case her principles, ‘Thatcherism’, would
be a   half-forgotten doctrine, mumbled about by historians instead of being the
single most potent medicine ever spooned   down the gagging post-war British.


During the 1979 election, using all the skills of her new image-makers and
advertising agency, and with a shrewd   understanding of the importance of
television, she was still trailing Callaghan in the personal popularity stakes,
by six points at the beginning of the campaign and a whopping nineteen points by
the end. It was Labour unpopularity   that cost the party power, not Mrs
Thatcher’s allure.


Without her the Tory government of 1979–83 would have been entirely different.
Without that confrontational   self-certainty and determination not to be
bested, Britain would have been back with a pay policy, Keynesian public
spending policies and a business-as-usual deal with the European Community
within eighteen months.


For a while chaos inside the Labour Party had helped protect her from the
electoral consequences of her move away   from the centre-ground. The Tories
might be hated but Labour were unelectable.


One of the many ironies of the Thatcher story is that she was rescued from the
political consequences of her   monetarism by the blunders of her hated Foreign
Office. In the great economic storms of 1979–81, and on the European   budget
battle, she had simply charged ahead, ignoring all the flapping around her in
pursuit of a single goal. In   the South Atlantic she would do exactly the same
and with her great luck she was vindicated. A pattern was being   established –
‘blinkered and proud of it’ – and she would move in the space of a couple of
months from being one of   the least popular prime ministers ever to being an
unassailable national heroine. It could all so easily have gone   wrong. A few
more fuses working on Argentine bombs, another delivery of French-made Exocet
missiles, a different   point chosen for the attack, and the Falklands War could
have been a terrible disaster, confirming an Argentine   dictatorship in power
and ending Mrs Thatcher’s political career.


Many people thought the war mere butchery for a meaningless prize. The most
famous comment came from that mordant   South American writer Jorge Luis Borges
who said it reminded him of two bald men fighting over a comb.


The Falklands War changed Margaret Thatcher’s personal story and the country’s
politics. But it merged into a wider   sense that confrontation was required in
public life.


Overhanging the violence at home and part of the backdrop of the Falklands War,
was the residual fear of global   nuclear war. With hindsight the grey old
Soviet Union of Brezhnev, Andropov and Chernenko may seem a rusted giant,
clanking helplessly towards its collapse. This was not how it seemed in the
early eighties.


In the late winter of 1979 Russian troops had begun arriving in Afghanistan.
Mikhail Gorbachev was an obscure   candidate member of the Politburo,
twenty-eighth in the pecking order, working on agricultural planning, and
glasnost was a word no one in the West had heard of. Poland’s free trade union
movement Solidarity was being crushed   by a military dictator.


Moscow had early and rightly identified Thatcher as one of its most implacable
enemies in the West and when, eighteen   months after her election victory, she
was joined by a new US President, Ronald Reagan, she had a soul-mate in
Washington.


If the first Thatcher government had been dominated by monetarism and the
Falklands War, the second would be   dominated by the miners’ strike. This was
the longest such strike in British history, one of the most bloody and   tragic
industrial disputes of modern times, and resulted in the total defeat of the
miners followed by the virtual   end of deep coal-mining in Britain.


The political force ranged against the miners in 1984 was entirely different
from the ill-prepared, Heath   administration they had defeated ten years
earlier. A shrewder non-revolutionary leader would not have chosen that   fight
at that time or, having done so, would have found a compromise after the first
months of the dispute. Today,   there are a handful of thousand miners left of
the 200,000 who went on strike.


An industry whose origins went back to the Middle Ages and which made Britain a
great industrial power, but which was   always dangerous, dirty and polluting,
lay down and died.


Getting your way at all costs with foreign dictators and militant union leaders
was one thing. Behaving similarly   with senior politicians in your own party
was another. Heseltine later wrote: ‘I saw many good people broken by the
Downing Street machine. I had observed the techniques of character
assassination: the drip, drip, of carefully   planted, unattributable stories
that were fed into the public domain, as colleagues became marked as somehow
“semi-detached” or “not one of us”.’ The great strength of Thatcher’s way of
governing was the way her   self-certainty gave her administration and the
country a surging sense of direction. Its weakness was it cut out so   many
others, ignored advice and humiliated anyone not seen as an uncritical
supporter.


Sir Nicholas Goodison, later Chairman of the Stock Exchange in the Thatcher
years, looked back on the mood by the   late seventies: ‘We still had exchange
controls. We had a Labour government intent on controlling everything, and no
freedom of capital movement. British people were not allowed to take capital
abroad; British institutions weren’t   allowed to invest capital abroad except
by special Treasury permissions . . . we were an insulated market.’12 It was
this world which was swept away on 23 October 1979 when Geoffrey Howe, to
general shock, abolished exchange   controls.


Howe himself likened it to walking off a cliff to see what happened. Bankers
noted there was no planning for this   revolution. Tony Benn said it showed that
international capitalism had finally defeated democracy.


In 1982, another slice of American business life came to London in the
multi-coloured jackets and raucous bear-pit   atmosphere of the new
international financial futures market, or LIFFE. Here the high-risk bets were
made on the   future value of commodities and currencies, in one of the older
buildings of the City, the Royal Exchange. Inside   its elegant shell roared an
atmosphere borrowed straight from Chicago, likened by startled observers at the
time to   an ill-bred casino.


The new Chancellor after the 1983 election, Nigel Lawson, a former financial
journalist, and the new Trade Secretary,   Cecil Parkinson, decided to do a deal
with the increasingly archaic looking Stock Exchange. It was struggling with a
long and wearisome court case brought by the Office of Fair Trading. The
ministers promised the legal action would   be dropped if the Stock Exchange
reformed itself. This was the final piece of action which led to the ‘Big Bang’
of   City deregulation, something which has a claim to be the single most
significant change of the whole Thatcher era,   on a par with confronting the
unions or privatization.


And then on 27 October 1986, this London Stock Exchange ceased to exist as the
institution it had formerly been. Its   makeover made it all but unrecognizable.
The new screen-quoted system SEAQ finally came on stream, the moment
remembered as the ‘Big Bang’ itself.


For millions of ordinary Britons who had only the haziest idea about the world
of finance, the revolution in lending   to buy their houses was as big a shock.


It became a good thing, a virtuous thing, to be a big-time borrower. People
found themselves harangued in   advertisements and junk mail to borrow more, to
defect from one bank to another, to extend the mortgage rather than   paying it
off.


All this would end in tears with the bust that followed and would be used for
many years afterwards by Labour’s   Gordon Brown as evidence of the Tory
‘boom-and-bust’ policies. But it was the consequence of a decisive break in the
financial regulations governing City and everyday life, which changed Britain,
probably forever.


The end of the age of controls and nationalistic finance meant also that British
manufacturing lost any hope of the   kind of long-term banking arrangements that
German and French rivals had enjoyed. The asset-stripping habit, buying
companies, dismantling them into component parts and selling them on, had become
a controversial part of British   business life in the seventies. The eighties’
financial revolution ensured it would remain so. There would be no   room for
old connections or long-term thinking in the new world.


There is a popular belief that the Thatcher governments never really intended to
privatize very much, and that they   stumbled upon an easy way of raising cash
by selling off assets almost by accident. If so, it was one heck of a   stumble.
During the decade £29 bn was raised in sales of land and businesses and £18 bn
from the sale to their   tenants of 1.24 million council homes. The gas that
cooked meals and warmed houses, oil coming ashore, aircraft   taking businessmen
and holiday-makers, and the airports they flew from, the phones and phone-lines
used to   communicate, cars, engines, steel and the water pipes and filtration
systems bringing the British their baths and   tea – all would be affected by
the greatest shift of assets from the State to private companies and individuals
in   the history of this country.


One of the influential economic writers about the Thatcher years said that
coining the word privatization was ‘a   master-stroke of public relations’ by
the government, which put it into worldwide circulation.


If Labour had been accused of creating a giant state sector whose employees
depended on high public spending and   could therefore be expected to become
loyal Labour voting-fodder, then the Tories were intent on creating a
‘property-owning democracy’ of voters whose interests were entirely different.


Old Labour was killed off not in the Commons but in the shopping centre and the
estate agents’ office.


Politicians learned two things. The first was that outside the Westminster
village, few British people seemed to care   at all who owned the companies and
services they depended upon, so long as the service was acceptable. This was
becoming a much less ideological country. The second thing they learned was that
politics could not step back and   wash its hands of what the privatized
companies then did. Ministers, not simply chief executives, would still be the
target of public anger and held responsible for any failings. This was becoming
a more aggressively consumerist   country. The result was that, while hundreds
of thousands of employees left the public sector to work for newly   private
corporations, the State grew in other ways, through the quangos, regulatory
bodies and bureaucrats now found   necessary to regulate and oversee the
privatized services.


Jim Callaghan was brought up piously, so when he told an audience in 1977 that
God had given Britain her best   opportunity for a hundred years in the shape of
North Sea oil, there is a chance that he meant it.


The oil seemed like a fairytale intervention, for whichever group of politicians
found themselves in power when the   pot of gold could finally be yanked open.


Its impact on the politics and public finances of Britain, first in the dying
days of old Labour and then during the   crucial years of the early Thatcherite
experiment in monetarism, can hardly be exaggerated. It helped bankroll
Thatcherism, for Britain was self-sufficient in oil by 1980.


A great new source of national wealth helped to produce mass unemployment, or at
least make it politically   possible.


The number of British refineries actually fell during the great oil decade of
1980–90, from twenty-one to thirteen,   and 40 per cent of that was
American-owned.


Even when it came to oil supply services, which more or less had to come
locally, British companies were slow to   catch up and won little extra business
overseas.


Finance was a similar story. In the early days of exploration, the US giants
were able to fund their work in the   North Sea themselves, developing rigs from
their earlier experiences in the Gulf of Mexico. The opaque nature of   their
internal accounting, and the much higher cost of getting any oil out, meant they
were appallingly hard for   British ministers and the Treasury to deal with.


Labour’s answer was to set up the British National Oil Corporation, BNOC, in
9176, which was meant to be both the   ears and eyes in the industry, to buy 51
per cent of the oil landed, and then to sell it on. It gave the government
some grip on the developing industry and built up formidable expertise at its
Scottish headquarters. Yet it was   essentially a bystander with modest powers,
compared to the great oil companies. Its oil-producing business was in   any
case privatized by Nigel Lawson in 1982, the largest privatization the world had
then seen; and the subsequent   company Britoil was taken over by BP six years
later.


Yet the grand hopes of ministers back in the mid-seventies that the oil
discoveries would kick-start a great   renaissance in banking, engineering,
shipbuilding and new service industry, was very wide of the mark.


Before 1979 Labour was struggling to rein in the American companies that had
arrived early and eager. But after 1979   the Conservatives were determined to
use the oil revenues quickly, to pay debt and cut taxes, rather than to invest
it in some long-term plan for industry.


This can be seen as a one-off waste, funding the squeeze of the early Thatcher
years but leaving little for future   generations left in the pot of gold at the
end of the North Sea rainbow.


British manufacturing continued to slither downhill, falling from 34 to 30 per
cent of national output in 1970–7,   before oil properly came on stream, and
then from 30 per cent to 23 per cent in the great oil decade. (By 2006 it
accounted for less than 15 per cent.) According to the government’s own figures,
2 million manufacturing jobs were   lost at this time.


The mid-eighties were a time when, after ferocious arguments about disarmament
and the Russian invasion of   Afghanistan, then a spate of espionage cases, the
Cold War was finally thawing. In the White House President Reagan,   scourge of
the ‘evil empire’, was set on creating ‘Star Wars’, the orbiting satellite and
anti-missile system   intended to make the United States invulnerable to Russian
attack. Yet he was ready to talk too, as the famous   summit with Gorbachev at
Reykjavik showed.


In the 1987 general election campaign Kinnock’s explanation about why Britain
would not simply have to surrender if   threatened by a Soviet nuclear attack
sounded as if he was advocating some kind of Dad’s Army guerrilla campaign
once the Russians had got here. With policies like these, he was not putting
Thatcher under the kind of pressure,   which, perhaps, she needed.


There had been some bad moments for the second Thatcher government. Most
obviously, she had nearly been assassinated.   The IRA bomb which demolished a
chunk of the Grand Hotel at Brighton during the 1984 Conservative conference was
intended as a response to Mrs Thatcher’s hard line at the time of the 1981
hunger strike.


If the IRA could not shake her, could anything else? There had been internal
rows, not only over Westland but more   ominously for the future, about economic
policy.


Other rows did. There was the Westland affair itself but also a botched sale of
British Leyland and the highly   unpopular use of British airbases for President
Reagan’s attack on Libya in 1986. After her hugely successful fight   to claw
back some of Britain’s overpayment to the European Community budget in her first
term, these were years of   Thatcherite drift over Europe, which would so
fatally damage her at the end.


At home a wider dilemma was emerging right across domestic policy, from the
inner cities to hospitals, schools to   police forces. It was one which would
puzzle both her successor governments, John Major’s and Tony Blair’s. It was
simply this: how does a modern government get things done?


Before the Thatcher revolution the Conservatives had been seen as, on balance,
defenders of local democracy.


Between 1979 and 1994, an astonishing 150 Acts of Parliament were passed
removing powers from local authorities, and   £24 billion a year, at 1994
prices, had been switched from them to unelected and mostly secretive
gatherings. The   first two Thatcher governments transferred power and
discretion away from people who had stood openly for election,   and towards the
subservient agents of Whitehall, often paid-up party members and well-meaning
stooges.


In the health service, early attempts to decentralize were rapidly reversed and
a vast top-down system of targets and   measurements was put in place, driven by
a new planning organization. It cost more and the service seemed to get   worse.


The biggest city councils, notably the Greater London Council, were simply
abolished. Its powers were distributed,   including to an unelected organization
controlled by Whitehall.


Personal relationships matter as much in modern diplomacy as they did in the
Renaissance, and the Thatcher–Gorbachev   courtship engaged her imagination and
human interest. She was becoming the closest ally Ronald Reagan had, in
another international relationship, which was of huge emotional and political
significance to her. In these years   she had become an international diva of
conservative politics, feted by crowds from Russia and China to New   York.


When the 1987 election campaign began, Thatcher had a clear idea about what her
third administration would do. Just   like Tony Blair later, she wanted more
choice for the users of state services. Tenants would be given more rights.
The basic rate of income tax would be cut. She would finally sort out local
government, ending the rates and   bringing in a tax with bite.


In the event, the Conservatives need not have worried at all. Despite a
last-minute BBC prediction of a hung   Parliament, and a late surge of Labour
self-belief, they romped home.


Afterwards, surveying the wreckage of their hopes, Kinnock and his team won
plaudits from the press for the   brilliance, verve and professionalism of their
campaign. It had been transformed from the shambles of only four   years
earlier.


And what of the SDP-Liberal Alliance, the big new idea of eighties politics?
They were out of puff. They had been   floundering in the polls for some time,
caught between Kinnock’s modest Labour revival and Thatcher’s continuing
popularity with a large and solid minority of voters.


For true believers the story of Margaret Thatcher’s third and last
administration can be summed up in the single   word, betrayal. Her hopes of a
free-market Europe were betrayed by the continentals, abetted by her own
treacherous   Foreign Office. Her achievements in bringing down inflation were
betrayed by her Chancellor, Nigel Lawson. Finally   she was betrayed directly –
‘treachery with a smile on its face’ – when her cabinet ministers turned on her
and   forced her to resign on 20 November 1990. The British revolution was sold
out by faint-hearts, its great leader   exiled to an executive home in south
London, and glory departed from the earth. But there is another word that sums
up the story better – not betrayal, but hubris. In the late eighties the
Thatcher revolution overreached itself.


Near the end, Thatcher’s fall was triggered by a disastrous policy for local
taxation whose blatant unfairness was   never properly considered by ministers,
as if it did not really matter. And by the end, her own brutal rudeness to
those around her left her almost friendless. She had been in power too long.


It was the same pattern in health. In 1988 too, the new Health Secretary,
Kenneth Clarke, pressed ahead with the   system of ‘money following the
patient’, a Monopoly-board version of the market in which hospitals ‘sold’ their
services, and local doctors, on behalf of the ill, ‘bought’ them.


Because the government did not really trust local people to work together to
improve the health service, the Treasury   seized control of budgets and
contracts. And to administer the system nearly 500 National Health Service
trusts were   formed, apparently autonomous but staffed by failed party
candidates, ex-councillors and party donors. Any   involvement by elected local
representatives was brutally terminated.


The more a leader is self-certain, the more there is in the world around her
that she wants to change and the fewer   other people she can trust. That means
taking more powers.


Under our constitution, local government is defenceless against a Prime Minister
with a secure parliamentary majority   and a loyal cabinet. So it has been
hacked away. It is time to address the moment when this programme of crushing
alternative centres of power came so badly unstuck it destroyed the Lady Lenin
of the free market herself.


Margaret Thatcher would say the poll tax was actually an attempt to save local
government. Like schools, hospitals   and housing, councils had been subject to
a grisly torture chamberful of pincers, bits, whips and flails as   ministers
tried to stop them spending money, or raising it, except as Whitehall wished.


This was the origin of the poll tax, or community charge as it was officially
known, a single flat tax for   everyone


The poorest in the land would pay as much as the richest. This broke a
principle, which stretched much further back   that the ‘post-war consensus’


On 31 March 1990, the day before the poll tax was due to take effect in England
and Wales, there was a massive   demonstration against it which ended with a
riot in Trafalgar Square. Scaffolding was ripped apart and used to throw   at
mounted police, cars were set on fire, shops smashed. More than 300 people were
arrested and 400 policemen hurt.   Thatcher dismissed it as mere wickedness.


She had conducted her premiership with a sense of vivid and immediate
self-dramatization, the heroine of peace and   war, fighting pitched battles in
coalfields and on the streets, word-punching her way through triumphal
conferences,   haranguing rival leaders, always with a sense that history was
being freshly minted, day by day.


When Margaret Thatcher left Downing Street for the last time in tears, she
already knew that she had successfully   completed a final political campaign,
which was to ensure that John Major, rather than Michael Heseltine replaced
her as Prime Minister. She had rallied support for him by phone among her
closest supporters. They felt he had not   been quite supportive enough. She
also harboured private doubts. So ended the most extraordinary and
nation-changing   premiership of modern British history.

