Inequality and the 1%
=====================
![](/bookimg/inequalityand1.jpg)

The most important problem we are facing now, today … is rising inequality.
Robert Shiller, recipient of the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economics


The top 1 per cent contribute to rising inequality, not just by taking more and
more, but by suggesting that such greed is justifiable and using their enormous
wealth to promote that concept.


In the UK members of the general public are now surer that the gap between rich
and poor is unwarranted than ever before recorded, and they are becoming more
sure of this with every year that passes.


Since 2008, after the initial shock of the drop in the value of their stock
holdings, the rich in both the US and the UK manoeuvred to become much richer.


The British top 1 per cent last secured a share of UK national income as large
as they do today back in 1937.


It is because of the growing divide between the 1 per cent and the 99 per cent
that those at the bottom of the 1 per cent don’t often look down. A financial
chasm is opening up between them and the best-off of the rest – the best-off of
the 99 per cent.


We know that it is because of the huge cost of the top 1 per cent that there is
more poverty in the UK than in any more equitable rich nation.


Many people are opposed to having a royal family, partly on cost grounds.
However, on those grounds they should be looking at the 1 per cent, which is
well over a thousand times more expensive in aggregate than all the royals
combined.


A majority has begun to believe that the poor have no right to live near the
centres of our most expensive cities, and it becomes possible for prime
ministers to claim that cutting benefits to the poorest in society is part of
some moral mission.


The US, Canada and the UK lead the rich world’s inequality league table. The
countries of the rest of Europe and Japan show that the opposite is possible.


What causes the wealth of the superrich to implode? The simple answer is that
the price of the rich becomes too high, the bubble grows too large, and
eventually there are too few people left with enough assets to service it.


Today one of the most closely comparable countries to the UK in terms of income
and taxation inequalities is Russia. But rich Russians still flee to the UK
because they are even better off here.


Although we could afford to run 1,100 royal families for the annual income cost
of the best-off 1 per cent, we could not afford to have 1,100 royal families as
rich in wealth.


Without the support of the upper middle class, it becomes harder for the elite
to rule, to secure the election of their favoured politicians, to control public
opinion, to remain elite.


Among the top 0.01 per cent are people who fervently believe that inequality is
good, that the poor deserve nothing more than to be poor because they do not
have it in them to be any better, and that the rich are worth their riches.


So it is time we took a closer look at life at the top and its effects on us
all.


The ideology that underlies elitism is imparted in childhood. For the elite,
especially in the most unequal countries where the educational systems help to
maintain the status quo, other people’s children can be greatly denigrated.


The country where the richest 1 per cent takes the most is also the rich country
where sixteen- to twenty-four-year-olds are most likely to be innumerate – the
United States of America. England is home to the third-most innumerate cohort of
young adults in the rich world.


The easiest way to increase the value of private education is to reduce the
quality of state education by simply spending less on it, just as reducing the
quality of the NHS increases the benefits of private healthcare without having
to do anything in particular to improve private healthcare.


When the top 1 per cent dominates society, as it does in the US and the UK
today, it is able to shape what we call education to work more in its favour, to
become less about learning and more about ranking. Children are repeatedly
tested and channelled towards what they are told is their allotted place along
the continuum.


As the divisions within our society grow, the main aim of teachers becomes no
longer to educate the child for life, but increasingly just to try to keep their
school out of trouble. They must teach children how to pass tests rather than
how to learn.


The UK’s education system is beginning to look more like that of the US than
like the schools and universities of other countries in Europe. Many American
private universities now spend just a sixth of their fee income on teaching.
These private providers take more than a fifth of fees in profit, and spend even
more on marketing.


Social mobility is lowest where local ‘choice’ in education superficially
appears highest. The Manchester local authority of Trafford has the highest
level of educational social segregation. This is due to secondary moderns and
grammar schools having been retained there, as well as private school provision
being high.


Rather than socially preparing children for the wider world, a private education
is likely to restrict the breadth and depth of their social contacts later in
life.


The country that many educationalists look to for good lessons is Finland, where
99.2 per cent of school education is state funded. In Finland there is no
inspection of teachers or league tables.


British children are highly segregated by income right from birth, and through
all their school days.


In the UK more money is spent on private education than almost anywhere else on
the planet.


When the 1 per cent have held so much sway over our society for so many decades,
the effect can be that otherwise sensible people begin to believe that it is
fair if the poorest are only given a minimum of resources, and just enough
education for their children, so that if one of them should turn out
unexpectedly to have ‘potential’, then it can be realised.


As the middle class shrinks, it becomes easier for the rich to argue that they
deserve to pass more of their wealth to their children, who, in turn, deserve to
receive it.


The idea of progressive improvement generation after generation is now a distant
memory.


When the historical abnormality of today’s highest incomes is pointed out some
still suggest that its recipients must be worth so much pay – presumably because
other people have become relatively worthless.


Huge wage packets do not appear to make them better bosses. Instead, extreme pay
means that stranger and more maladjusted people end up becoming selected for the
top jobs.


The majority of the population appear to accept that the bankers were out of
control, and caused the financial crisis. But the 1 per cent has subsequently
behaved as if the 99 per cent are fools, and persuaded the current government to
place the blame for Britain’s economic crisis at the door of the previous
government’s spending.


Despite the greed of those at the top of the heap, many still find fault first
with the unfortunates struggling at the bottom. Young people who cannot find
employment typically appear among these innocent targets. Foremost among those
casting aspersions on the young is David Cameron.


Until most allowances were cancelled, in 2010, there was an exceptionally high
uptake of Educational Maintenance Allowances by those choosing to study rather
than claim dole.


Almost all young people would choose work over the dole – almost any work. You
have to be completely out of touch not to know this.


For the 2.5 million young adults who are unemployed or underemployed in Britain,
the monies required to finance the kinds of jobs they could do are instead being
sucked up by a tiny elite of one hundred individuals who cannot possibly need
it.


The World Economic Forum, a body of some 700 global experts, ranks growing
inequality as the greatest risk to the economic health of the world. Climate
change comes second, and the high and rising levels of unemployment third. These
experts are no radical leftists.


You cannot wait for those much richer than you to act; and if the disparity
between us and them continues to widen, there are many far broader reasons to be
concerned than pure self-interest.


In reporting all this in 2013, the master of Hertford College, Oxford, Will
Hutton, was forced to conclude: ‘We are governed by charlatans.’ And he asked
his readers: ‘Who cares for the condition of Britain or its people?


But too many of today’s 1 per cent have been brought up to think they know what
is best for those beneath them. And, like the worst of their Victorian
antecedents, some think it helps the poor to have money taken away from them.


Thousands of unemployed people are now compelled to work without pay. The
companies employing them are allowed to keep the number of wageless workers
toiling for them secret. Even charities, such as the Salvation Army, are
involved.


The 1 per cent cannot allow the bottom 10 per cent to be paid decently if they
themselves are to remain so disproportionately rich.


By the end of 2013 the richest 300 people in the world held $3.7 trillion, or
about $12 billion each, and their collective wealth rose the most in that year –
by 16.5 per cent. The idea that they had earned that money is highly
questionable.


Inequality continues to grow rapidly. There is perhaps no country where this
trend is more pronounced than in the United Kingdom. The wealth of the richest
one hundred people in the UK now equates to that of the poorest 30 per cent of
all UK households, and that ratio is worsening.


In 2013 a rich British man and his wife bought their seventh house in London – a
four-storey, £1.35 million Georgian townhouse – for their twenty-seven-year-old
son, Nicky, whose computer games firm and football agency were being dissolved
five years after their launch. This would be just another story of the rich
buying up more property than they can use if it were not that Nicky’s father was
former prime minister Tony Blair.


A whole generation is growing up asking where the money is, why they have to pay
to study, and why there are so few good jobs – let alone homes they can afford.


The current government’s actions, typified by George Osborne’s 2014 budget of
give-aways for the rich, are designed to increase poverty among the majority.


Britain is a rich country, but it is set to share out what it has ever more
unfairly, ensuring that the 1 per cent get even richer.


Some of the world’s leading economists place rising inheritance as the
third-most-important factor driving up income inequality, after lower taxes on
the rich and the recent lowering of the collective bargaining power of unions.


In the 1970s the average politician represented the interests of the median
voter. Researchers have shown that political representation has moved from
representing the median voter to representing mainly the views of the 1 per
cent.


In other words, the UK parliament’s main function today is not to represent the
people, but to preserve the power of a few.


The rich rarely become so through their own efforts – and it is partly because
it is not their work that has made them rich that many so carefully orchestrate
the defence of their wealth.


Britain in the twenty-first century is a deeply divided nation. Whilst a handful
of people at the top have never had it so good, millions of families are
struggling to make ends meet. Growing numbers of Britons are turning to
charity-run foodbanks, yet at the same time the highest earners in the UK have
had the biggest tax cuts of any country in the world. And whilst low-paid
workers are seeing their wages stagnate, the super-rich are seeing their pay and
bonuses spiral up. Oxfam, 2014


The current ‘quantitative easing’ policies of central banks have had the effect
of making the rich richer. The Financial Times has described the policy as
‘designed by the rich for the rich’.


A progressive government would have given more to those who had least –
especially since all of the money would then have been spent, rather than
hoarded, and might have then boosted demand.


The Bank of England itself has noted that Britain’s richest 5 per cent own
almost half of all the assets that have increased most in value due to
quantitative easing.


Soon the very rich will know even less about the lives of the rest. But the rest
are learning more and more about them, and the harm that comes from their
current extremely expensive existence.


Just as the New Scientist was revealing a consensus that inequality was bad for
health, the British prime minister announced that he no longer wanted the UK
government to assess the effect its policies have on social equality.


The 1 per cent sees the NHS as a river of money coming from the government which
can be partially diverted into private healthcare – an historically lucrative
source of income for them.


In the US, if you do not have insurance then you do not receive that care. In
fact, only the 1 per cent can afford to be seriously ill in the US.


Men who die in Kensington and Chelsea are, on average, fourteen years older than
men who die in Glasgow; for women, the gap is twelve years. If the richest are
compared to the poorest, the average gaps are far wider.


Growing economic inequality as the richest take more and more for themselves is
bad for everyone’s health.


As the bankers take more and more, the old and poor begin to die younger.


Inequalities in income and wealth will rise in future as a result of the student
loan system – and when such inequalities rise, inequalities in health follow
suit.


Some 1,125 families in the UK hold $100 million or more in assets – far more
than in any other country in Europe, despite other countries such as Germany
being both more prosperous and more populous.


Unequal political power is the endgame of widening inequality – its most noxious
and nefarious consequence.


When money is spread around as poorly as today, the stink of corruption becomes
very hard to disguise, and the harm caused to those at the bottom, who are
robbed of almost every last penny, becomes palpable.
[\*](#ASIN:B00O7GHS3K;LOC:2255)


Our grandparents’ generation created the National Health Service while ours came
up with the National Lottery.


The UK has a very expensive problem that the rest of Europe has managed largely
to avoid: an overpaid and underachieving 1 per cent.


These exceptionally highly paid bankers are the people who caused the financial
crisis in the UK.


The subsequent Libor scandal dwarfed all previous financial scams in the history
of markets. And the UK’s banks are still by far the most indebted in Europe. So
much for paying the most to get the best.


The greedy used the crash to become richer, to buy assets cheaply, and to make
new profits out of others’ impoverishment. But it doesn’t have to be this way.


Increasingly, the rich feel that they are entitled to as much as they can
possibly get away with – that they are entitled to say outrageous things and
that no one else is entitled to anything much.


It is clear that higher taxation can reduce greed at the top more effectively
than any other mechanism.


The alternative is to see the 1 per cent become richer and richer, pollute more,
and lecture the rest of us on our behaviour, while they plot ever more elaborate
ways of behaving badly.


All of us need to believe more strongly that better outcomes can be achieved –
just as feminists, anti-racists and democrats have done in the pdecades, and has
appointed a series of close advisors not just from the 1 per cent, but often
from his own school; and, hardly surprisingly ast.
[\*](#ASIN:B00O7GHS3K;LOC:2518)


It is up to the rest of us to control these people – for their own good as well
as ours.


This stupidity needs to be halted. become relatively worthless. Today a
non-violent war of attrition on concentrated wealth is needed


In the UK the prime minister was a member of the 1 per cent by dint of his
wealth long before he entered parliament. He presides over a cabinet containing
more members of the 1 per cent than has been the case for decades, and has
appointed a series of close advisors not just from the 1 per cent, but often
from his own school; and, hardly surprisingly he does not explain to his
electorate how the business strategies of his friends have impoverished the
middle of British society.


Is it any wonder inequalities in the UK continue to rise?



When the elite now in charge hear of a young mother, denied benefits, jumping
from a balcony holding her child, some do not shudder.They think this is
‘collateral damage’ in their ‘war on poverty’.


[amzn:B00O7GHS3K]

