Inventing the Future: Postcapitalism and a World Without Work
=============================================================
![](/bookimg/inventingfuture.jpg)

For much of the twentieth century, the future held sway over our dreams. The
popular imagination of the left envisaged societies vastly superior to anything
we dream of today.


Yet, for all the glossy sheen of our technological era, the glimmers of a better
future are trampled and forgotten under the pressures of an increasingly
precarious and demanding world.


The ongoing fallout from the economic crisis has led governments to embrace the
paralysing death-spiral of austerity.


At a planetary level, things appear even more ominous. We feel incapable of
evading or controlling social and environmental forces.


Neoliberalism has held sway for decades, and social democracy exists largely as
an object of nostalgia. As crises gather force and speed, politics withers and
retreats. In this paralysis of the political imaginary, the future has been
cancelled.


Neoliberalism has failed, social democracy is impossible, and only an
alternative vision can bring about universal prosperity and emancipation.
Articulating and achieving this better world is the fundamental task of the left
today.


Today it appears that the greatest amount of effort is needed to achieve the
smallest degree of change. Despite the desires of millions for a better world,
the effects of these movements prove minimal.


Perhaps most depressing, even when movements have some successes, they are in
the context of overwhelming losses. Residents across the UK, for example, have
successfully mobilised in particular cases to stop the closure of local
hospitals. Yet these real successes are overwhelmed by larger plans to gut and
privatise the National Health Service.


Similarly, recent anti-fracking movements have been able to stop test drilling
in various localities – but governments nevertheless continue to search for
shale gas resources and provide support for companies to do so.


What can we conclude from all of this? The recent cycle of struggles has to be
identified as one of overarching failure, despite a multitude of small-scale
successes and moments of large-scale mobilisation.


What has gone wrong?


As our political, economic, social and technological world changes, tactics and
strategies which were previously capable of transforming collective power into
emancipatory gains have now become drained of their effectiveness.


Petitions, occupations, strikes, vanguard parties, affinity groups, trade
unions: all arose out of particular historical conditions. The fact that certain
ways of organising and acting were once useful does not guarantee their
continued relevance.


Our world has moved on, becoming more complex, abstract, nonlinear and global
than ever before.


Political movements based around keeping a hospital open or preventing evictions
are all admirable, but they are importantly different from movements trying to
challenge neoliberal capitalism. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:227)


Given the nature of global capitalism, any postcapitalist project will require
an ambitious, abstract, mediated, complex and global approach
[\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:230) .


The project of this book is to begin outlining an alternative – a way for the
left to navigate from the local to the global, and synthesise the particular
with the universal.


It must combine an updated way of thinking politics with an upgraded means of
doing politics.


Increasingly, multipolar global politics, economic instability, and
anthropogenic climate change outpace the narratives we use to structure and make
sense of our lives and which characteristically operates on scales of space and
time that go far beyond any individual’s unaided perception.


While we might have an idea of what an economy consists of, it can only be
observed symptomatically through key statistical indexes. Despite everything
that has been written about capitalism, we still struggle to understand its
dynamics and its mechanisms. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:259)


We lack a mental picture of how individual and collective human action can be
situated within the unimaginable vastness of the global economy.


For the left at least, an analysis premised on the industrial working class was
a powerful way to interpret the totality of social and economic relations in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.


Today, the old models often falter in the face of new problems; we lose the
capacity to understand our position in history and in the world at large. We
feel adrift in a world we do not understand.


If complexity presently outstrips humanity’s capacities to think and control,
there are two options: one is to reduce complexity down to a human scale; the
other is to expand humanity’s capacities. We endorse the latter position.


\*\*\*


While the left has traditionally been associated with ideals of equality we
believe that freedom is an equally essential principle of left modernity.


Capitalism has repeatedly asserted its superiority by upholding an idea of
negative freedom.


In practice, it translates into a modicum of political freedom from the state
and the economic freedoms to sell our labour power and to choose between shiny
new consumer goods.


Under negative freedom, the rich and the poor are considered equally free,
despite the obvious differences in their capacities to act.


Against this limited concept of freedom, we argue for a much more substantial
version.


One of the biggest indictments of capitalism is that it enables the freedom to
act for only a vanishingly small few.


A primary aim of a postcapitalist world would therefore be to maximise synthetic
freedom, to enable the flourishing of all of humanity and the expansion of our
collective horizons.


Achieving this involves [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:1515) the provision of the
basic necessities of life, the expansion of social resources, and the
development of technological capacities. Taken together, these form a synthetic
freedom that is a collective historical achievement rather than the result of
simply leaving people be.


In the first place, synthetic freedom entails the maximal provision of the basic
resources needed for a meaningful life: things like income, time, health and
education. Without these resources, most people are left formally but not really
free.


Free time is the basic condition for self-determination and the development of
our capacities. Equally, synthetic freedom demands the provision of a basic
income to all in order for them to be fully free. Time and money therefore
represent key components of freedom in any substantive sense.


We have seen that, without a conception of the future, the left becomes bound to
a defence of tradition, and to protecting bunkers of resistance.


To truly enable the liberation of futures in the plural, the current global
order premised on waged labour and capitalist accumulation will need to be
transcended first.


A left modernity will, in other words, require building a postcapitalist and
post-work platform upon which multiple ways of living could emerge and flourish.


We have so far argued that the contemporary left tends towards a folk politics
that is incapable of turning the tide against global capitalism. In its place,
the left needs to reclaim the contested legacy of modernity and advance visions
for a new future.


Just as the Mont Pelerin Society foreshadowed the crisis of Keynesianism and
prepared a full-spectrum set of responses, so too should the left prepare for
the coming crisis of work and surplus populations.


While the effects of the 2008 crisis continue to reverberate throughout the
world, it is too late to take advantage of that moment; all around us we can see
that capital has recovered and consolidated itself in a renewed and sharpened
form. The left must instead prepare for the next opportunity.
[\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:1621)


The history of capitalism is the history of the world’s population being
transformed into proletarian existence through the advancing dispossession of
the peasantry.


Unemployment as we understand it today was an invention of capitalism.


‘The misery of being exploited by capitalists is nothing compared to the misery
of not being exploited at all.’


This is the crisis of work that capitalism faces in the coming years and
decades: a lack of formal or decent jobs for the growing numbers of the
proletarian population.


The very social basis of capitalism as an economic system – the relationship
between the proletariat and employers, with waged work mediating between them –
is crumbling.


\*\*\* [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:237)


Very little of the global labour force is employed in formal wage labour, and
this number has only decreased in the wake of the 2008 crisis.


The relatively low unemployment levels of the UK after the 2008 crisis are
largely a result of more self-employed people living off poverty wages. It is
estimated that nearly 5 per cent of the working population is presently on
zero-hours contracts. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:1786)


Unemployment is associated with a fifth of all global suicides.


With the world economy creating jobs so slowly that the number of jobs will
remain significantly below pre-crisis levels for at least a decade. Unemployment
and the threat of it are becoming the norms for the labour force.


While unemployment measures give us some sense of the size of the surplus
population problem, it is precarity, jobless recoveries and mass urban
marginality that truly express the squeeze on the global labour market.


Capital requires a particular type of surplus population: cheap, docile and
pliable.118 Without these characteristics, this excess of humanity becomes a
problem for capital.


Not content to lie down and accept its disposability, it makes itself heard
through riots, mass migration, criminality, and all sorts of actions that
disrupt the existing order.


The tight monetary policy of the early 1980s was therefore precisely an effort
to undermine the power of the working class, increase unemployment to a level
acceptable for capital, and end the dream of full employment.


Increasingly, the welfare state is becoming little more than an institution
designed to deploy the surplus against the working class.


The management of surplus populations does not just revolve around the
production of disciplined workers and pliable jobseekers. Increasingly,
domination and punitive measures are becoming the norm in dealing with the
excess to capital.


Today we see the militarisation of America’s border with Mexico and the rise of
Fortress Europe in response to mistaken fears about jobs being taken by
foreigners.


Lethal barriers to migration are one of the primary mechanisms used today to
segregate and manage global surplus populations. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:1979)


Mass incarceration is a system of social control aimed primarily at surplus
populations rather than at crime. For example, increases in manufacturing
unemployment are associated globally with increases in police employment.


Those who are unwilling to be forced into slums seek better opportunities
elsewhere, only to be locked up or left for dead on the Mediterranean.


Mass incarceration has therefore become a means to manage and control this
surplus that has been excluded from the labour market and left in poverty.


Under capitalism, jobs have been pivotal to our social lives and sense of who we
are, as well as being the sole source of income for most people. What the next
two decades portend is a future in which the global economy is increasingly
unable to produce enough jobs yet where we remain dependent upon jobs for our
living.


In the face of these tensions, the political project for the
twenty-first-century left must be to build an economy in which people are no
longer dependent upon wage labour for survival.


The future remains open, and which direction the crisis of work takes is
precisely the political struggle before us.


Any meaningful vision of the future will set out proposals and goals, and this
chapter is a contribution to that potential discussion.


\*\*\*


The proposals in this chapter will not break us out of capitalism, but they do
promise to break us out of neoliberalism, and to establish a new equilibrium of
political, economic and social forces.


This chapter charts a way forward: building a post-work society on the basis of
fully automating the economy, reducing the working week, implementing a
universal basic income, and achieving a cultural shift in the understanding of
work.


Our first demand is for a fully automated economy. With automation, machines can
increasingly produce all necessary goods and services, while also releasing
humanity from the effort of producing them.


Automation and the replacement of human labour should be enthusiastically
accelerated and targeted as a political project of the left.


The emerging wave of automation will drastically change the composition of the
labour market, and potentially lead to a significant reduction in demand for
workers.


Out of the US companies that could benefit from incorporating industrial robots,
less than 10 per cent have done so. This reiterates the importance of making
full automation a political demand, rather than assuming it will come about from
economic necessity.


Between 47 and 80 per cent of today’s jobs are capable of being automated. We
should take these numbers as a standard against which to measure our success.
[\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:2174)


Labour will not be immediately or entirely eliminated, but instead progressively
reduced. Full automation is a utopian demand that aims to reduce necessary
labour as much as possible.


A second major demand for building a post-work platform involves a return to
classic ideas about reducing the length of the working week with no cut in pay.


The near century-long push for shorter working hours ended abruptly during the
Great Depression, when business opinion and government policy decided to use
make-work programmes in response to unemployment.


Many of us are now tied to work all the time, with emails, phone calls, texts
and job anxieties impinging upon us constantly.


On top of this, a vast amount of work is unpaid. A shorter working week would
bring a general reduction in the stress, anxiety and mental health problems
fostered by neoliberalism.


One of the most important reasons for reducing work time is that it is a demand
that both consolidates and generates class power.


The goal of reducing the working week should be an immediate and prominent
demand of the twenty-first-century left.


There is already a high level of public desire for the reduction of the working
week, with public opinion polls showing a majority of the population support the
idea.


Free time will be of little value if people continue struggling to make ends
meet. This is why an essential demand in a post-work society is for a universal
basic income (UBI), giving every citizen a liveable amount of money without any
means-testing.


The idea has global scope, having been promoted forcefully by groups in Brazil,
South Africa, Italy and Germany, and by an international network involving over
twenty countries, in the wake of the 2008 crisis and the austerity regimes put
in place after it.


Depending on how UBI is presented, it is capable of generating support from
across the political spectrum [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:2340) .


The first point to emphasise is that the demand for UBI is a demand for a
political transformation, not just an economic one. The real significance of UBI
lies in the way it overturns the asymmetry of power that currently exists
between labour and capital.


The second related feature of UBI is that it transforms precarity and
unemployment from a state of insecurity to a state of voluntary flexibility.


Third, a basic income would necessitate a rethinking of the values attributed to
different types of work. The result would be that hazardous, boring and
unattractive work would have to be better paid, while more rewarding,
invigorating and attractive work would be less well paid. In other words, the
nature of work would become a measure of its value, not merely its
profitability.


Finally, a basic income is a fundamentally feminist proposal. Its disregard for
the gendered division of labour overcomes some of the biases of the traditional
welfare state predicated upon a male breadwinner.


The financial independence that comes with a basic income is also crucial to
developing the synthetic freedom of women.


While a universal basic income may appear economically reformist, its political
implications are therefore significant.


For all of these reasons, the classic social democratic demand for full
employment should be replaced with the future-orientated demand for full
unemployment.


The most difficult hurdles for UBI – and for a post-work society – are not
economic, but political and cultural: political, because the forces that will
mobilise against it are immense; and cultural, because work is so deeply
ingrained into our very identity.


Nneoliberalism has established a set of incentives that compel us to act and
identify ourselves as competitive subjects.


Work, no matter how degrading or low-paid or inconvenient, is deemed an ultimate
good. This is the mantra of both mainstream political parties and most trade
unions. This is matched by a parallel cultural effort demonising those without
jobs.


With work tied so tightly into our identities, overcoming the work ethic will
require us overcoming ourselves. This position must be rejected as a holdover
from a now-transcended stage of human history. Work, and the suffering that
accompanies it, should not be glorified.


Actions to make precarity and joblessness an increasingly visible political
problem would go some way to generating the support for a post-work society.


In the end, our choice is between glorifying work and the working class or
abolishing them both.


Achieving this will require the realisation of four minimal demands: 1.Full
automation 2.The reduction of the working week 3.The provision of a basic income
4.The diminishment of the work ethic.


This is not a simple, marginal reform, but an entirely new hegemonic formation
to compete against the neoliberal and social democratic options.


The ambition here is to take back the future from capitalism and build ourselves
the twenty-first-century world we want.


\*\*\*


It is to provide the time and money that are central to any meaningful
conception of freedom.


The struggles that such a project will face require that the left move past its
folk-political horizon, rebuild its power and adopt an expansive strategy for
change.


An array of powerful forces is invested in the continuation of the status quo,
and the left has been devastated over the past few decades.


To achieve a meaningful post-work society therefore requires changing the
present political conditions. his requires the left to face squarely up to the
dismal situation before it: trade unions lying in ruin, political parties
rendered into neoliberal puppets, and a waning intellectual and cultural
hegemony. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:2515)


And beyond this lies the fact that our inner lives, our social world and our
built environment are organised around work and its continuation. Fundamentally,
it is a matter of transforming society from the ground up.


We must prepare for the long term if we wish to alter the terrain of politics
substantially. It will neither emerge all at once nor in the wake of some
revolutionary moment. The classic Leninist strategy of building dual power with
a revolutionary party and overthrowing the state is obsolete. The electoral
reformist approach is equally a failure.


And as the latest cycle of struggles has shown, the folk-political approach of
prioritising various forms of immediacy has failed to transform society.


A counter-hegemonic strategy entails a project to overturn the dominant
neoliberal common sense and rejuvenate the collective imagination.


Fundamentally, it is an attempt to install a new common sense – one organised
around the crisis of work and its effects on the proletariat, seeking to alter
the balance of power in preparation for when a crisis upsets the legitimacy of
society and aimed at overthrowing capitalist universalism.


A sequence of neoliberal administrations throughout the world, in conjunction
with a network of think tanks and a largely right-leaning media, have been able
to transform the range of possible options to exclude even the most moderate of
socialist measures.


Hegemony, or rule by the engineering of consent, is as much a material force as
it is a social one. It is something embedded in human minds, social and
political organisations, individual technologies and the built environment that
constitutes our world.


The left must therefore develop a sociotechnical hegemony: to navigate the
present technical, economic, social, political and productive hegemony towards a
new point of equilibrium beyond the imposition of wage labour.


Today’s world remains firmly confined within the parameters of capitalist
realism.


The future has been cancelled. We are more prone to believing that ecological
collapse is imminent, increased militarisation inevitable, and rising inequality
unstoppable.


Browbeaten by decades of failure, the left has consistently retreated from its
traditionally grand ambitions. The goals of an ambitious left, which once aimed
at the total transformation of society, have been reduced down to minor
tinkering at the edges of society. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:2695)


The ways we organise our work lives, families and communities are given a fresh
appearance when viewed from the perspective of a post-work world.


Why do we devote one-third of our lives in submission to someone else? Why do we
insist that domestic work (performed primarily by women) go unpaid?


If the left is to counter the common sense of neoliberalism (‘there’s not enough
money’, ‘everyone must work’, ‘government is inefficient’), utopian thinking
will be essential. We need to think big.


It is the educational apparatus that indoctrinates new generations in the
dominant values of a particular society, reproducing its ideology through the
decades. Transforming the educational system of intellectuals is therefore a key
task in building a new hegemony.


If the broad cultural and academic ideas of how to run economies are to change,
at a minimum it will require more pluralism in the education of students.


Since 2000, numerous universities have seen students vocally demand pluralism in
their economics education.


Post-Crash Economic Society and Rethinking Economics that are making concerted
efforts to change the curriculum. Equally, organisations like the New Economics
Foundation are leading the way in creating models of the economy that can inform
leftist political goals, as well as fostering public literacy in economic
matters.


Hegemony is embedded not only in the ideas of a society, but also in the built
environment and technologies that surround us.


Current infrastructure tends to shape our societies into individualistic,
carbon-based, competitive forms, regardless of what individuals or collectives
may want.


No aspect of our lives remains untouched by technology, and indeed, many would
argue that humanity is intrinsically technological.


Under capitalism, technology’s potential is drastically constrained – reduced to
a mere vehicle for generating profit and controlling workers.


The Lucas Plan demonstrates a clear example of how repurposing the productive
forces of society might be used to transform the technological direction of
society. It was an attempt to reorganise technological development away from
marginal weapon improvements and towards socially useful goods. It is an ideal
model of how technical knowledge, political awareness and collective power can
be combined to achieve a radical repurposing of the material world.


A new world will have to be built, not on the ruins of the old, but on the most
advanced elements of the present.


One goal of any future-orientated left could be in determining how specific
technologies can be repurposed and mobilised towards a postcapitalist project.
Without a simultaneous shift in the hegemonic ideas of society, new technologies
will continue to be developed along capitalist lines, and old technologies will
remain beholden to capitalist values.


A counter-hegemonic strategy would include efforts to transform the common sense
of society, revive a utopian social imagination, rethink the possibilities of
economics, and eventually repurpose technological and economic infrastructures.


The power of the global working class is today severely compromised, and a
return to past strength seems unlikely. The fragmentation of the working class
means that the task today must be to knit together a new collective ‘we’.


A broad spectrum of society needs to be brought together as an active and
transformative force. A populist movement also needs to act in and through a
series of organisations, as well as aiming to achieve the overturning of
neoliberal common sense and create a new one in its place. It must seek to build
hegemonic forms of power, in all their diverse forms, both inside and outside
the state.


\*\*\*


On a purely quantitative level, the left is not noticeably ‘weaker’ than the
right, the reverse seems to be true. The problem lies in the next step: how that
force is organised and deployed.


There are a variety of essential tasks to be carried out in a successful
political movement. No single type of organisation is sufficient for performing
all of these roles and bringing about large-scale political change.


It requires mobilisation under a common vision of an alternative world, rather
than loose and pragmatic alliances. And it entails developing an array of
broadly compatible organisations.


Inevitably, an ecosystem of organisations is forged in specific circumstances,
with different decisions being made in the face of different political contexts.


That said, a broad social movement would be essential to any anti-work politics,
affording a wide range of different organisational and tactical compositions.


If a major social transformation such as the post-work project is to occur, it
will come on the back of a mass movement rather than simply decreed from on
high.


If a counter-hegemonic project is to be successful, it will require an injection
of radical ideas into the mainstream, and not just the building of increasingly
fragmented audiences outside it.


Alongside the media, intellectual organisations are indispensable components of
any political ecology.


We believe many unions will be better served by refocusing towards a post-work
society and the liberating aspects of a reduced working week, job sharing and a
basic income. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:3274)


Moreover, shifting in a post-work direction overcomes some of the key impasses
between ecological movements and organised labour.


Changing the aims of unions and organising community-wide will help to turn
unions away from classic – and now failing – social democratic goals, and will
be essential to any successful renewal of the labour movement.


Political parties will have a role in any ecology of organisations –
particularly if the traditional social democratic parties continue to collapse
and enable a new generation of parties to emerge.


Ensuring a post-work society for all will require more than just individual
workplaces; it demands success at the level of the state as well.


The avoidance of the state – common to so many folk-political approaches – is a
mistake. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:3291) Mass movements and parties should be
seen as tools of the same populist movement, each capable of achieving different
things. Simply to reject parliamentary politics is to ignore the real advances
these policies can make.


It should be clear how far away we now are from the folk-political fetishism of
localism, horizontalism and direct democracy. An ecology of organisations does
not deny that such organisational forms may have a role, but it rejects the idea
that they are sufficient.


What we are calling for, therefore, is a functional complementarity between
organisations, rather than the fetishising of specific organisations or
organisational forms.


Even with a healthy organisational ecology and a mass unified movement, change
is impossible without opportunities to leverage the movement’s power. The
significance of such points of leverage can hardly be overestimated.


Political tactics are a dynamic field of forces, and experimentation is
essential in working around new state and corporate impediments to change.


Any future left must be as technically fluent as it is politically fluent. In
the end, what is required is an analysis of the automation trends that are
restructuring production and circulation, and a strategic understanding of where
new points of leverage might develop.


It is one of the myopias of many on the left to only see workers’ power coming
from disrupting production, when in fact contesting the existing order has taken
numerous forms outside the workplace.


A post-work world will not emerge out of the benevolence of capitalists, the
inevitable tendencies of the economy or the necessity of crisis.


The power of the left – broadly construed – needs to be rebuilt before a
post-work society can become a meaningful strategic option. This will involve a
broad counter-hegemonic project that seeks to overturn neoliberal common sense
and to rearticulate new understandings of ‘modernisation’, ‘work’ and ‘freedom’.


This will necessarily be a populist project that mobilises a broad swathe of
society.


Where, then, do we stand?


We have argued that the most promising way forward lies in reclaiming modernity
and attacking the neoliberal common sense that conditions everything from the
most esoteric policy discussions to the most vivid emotional states.


We have outlined one possible project, in the form of a post-work politics that
frees us to create our own lives and communities.


Triumph in the political battles to achieve it will require organising a broadly
populist left, building the organisational ecosystem necessary for a
full-spectrum politics on multiple fronts, and leveraging key points of power
wherever possible.


Against the austerity of conservative forces, and the austere life promised by
anti-modernists, the demand for a post-work world revels in the liberation of
desire, abundance and freedom. [\*](#ASIN:B015Z7M5OG;LOC:3464)


Building the future means accepting the risk of unintended consequences and
imperfect solutions.


To unleash technological advancement, we must move beyond capitalism and
liberate creativity from its current strictures.


The argument of this book has been that the left can neither remain in the
present nor return to the past. To construct a new and better future, we must
begin taking the necessary steps to build a new kind of hegemony.


Rather than seeking temporary and local relief in the various bunkers of folk
politics, we must today move beyond these limits.


Neoliberalism, as secure as it may seem today, contains no guarantee of future
survival.


Our task now is to invent what happens next.

[amzn:B015Z7M5OG]

