Islam – A Short History
=======================

By **Karan Armstrong**

It must also be recalled that beliefs and doctrines are not as important in
Islam as they are in Christianity. Like Judaism, Islam is a religion that
requires people to live in a certain way, rather than to accept certain creedal
propositions.


Politics has never been central to the Christian religious experience… But
politics was no secondary issue for Muslims. We have seen that it had been the
theatre of their religious quest. Salvation didn’t mean redemption from sin, but
the creation of a just society in which the individual could more easily make
that existential surrender of his or her whole being that would bring them
fulfilment. The policy was therefore a matter of supreme importance, and
throughout the twentieth century there has been one attempt after another to
create a truly Islamic state.


Many Western are also becoming uncomfortable about the absence of spirituality
in their lives. They do not necessarily want to return to pre-modern religious
lifestyles or conventionally institutional faith. But there is a growing
appreciation that, at its best, religion has helped human beings cultivate
decent values. Islam has kept the notions of social justice, equality, tolerance
and practical compassion at the forefront of the Muslim conscience for
centuries. Muslims did not always live up to these ideals and frequently found
difficulty in incarnating them in their social and political institutions. But
the struggle to achieve this was for centuries the mainspring of Islamic
spirituality.

