The Neoliberal Crisis
=====================

By **Michael Rustin**

Hall and Massey each emphasise the radical ambition of the neoliberal project in
its British incarnation. They see this as it is embodied in the programmes of
the current Coalition, in those of its Thatcherite predecessor, and in New
Labour’s abject surrender to the values and pressures of neoliberalism in during
its thirteen years of office. I, by contrast, will draw attention to the
fragility of this neoliberal project in Britain, and to the unlikelihood that it
can succeed in achieving the stable hegemony it aims for. It is certainly the
case that the Coalition project is exceptionally bold, and that in their broad
ambitions if not in their grasp of details the Cameron Conservatives were well
prepared to make the most of their arrival in government. But the Coalition’s
aims also carry with them, almost as the necessary concomitant of their
radicalism, a high risk of failure. One can see the Tory-led Coalition
government, as no doubt do some of its members, as determined to render
irreversible the imposition of the power of capital and markets over all the
democratic and collective forces, which have over many decades resisted their
domination. But one can also view its programme as an ideologically driven
attempt to resolve the deep crisis faced by the United Kingdom in the context of
the global market system, which in reality has little hope of success.

The Thatcherites certainly had a clear understanding that their priority was to
achieve a decisive defeat of what they saw as a collectivist threat to both
markets and social hierarchy. This was, for the right at least, an explicit form
of class warfare.

The Coalition’s dominant idea (much more important to it than its ‘Big Society’)
is that the core problem of the British economy has been excessive public
spending. Its particular critique is of the alleged excesses of the past ten
years, but the implication of its analysis is that the problem is much
longer-lasting. Ostensibly and immediately, the problem is to reduce the public
deficit, as a defensive operation to protect Britain from the (extremely
unlikely) threat of sovereign debt default. But its longer-term purpose is more
fundamental: the explicit aim of Coalition economic strategy is radically to
alter the balance between private and state expenditures in the British economy.

Over the last thirty years, bourgeois and aristocratic modes of domination have
further intertwined with one another, while the countervailing values of
equality, democracy and citizenship have been weakened, as their base in
working-class solidarity and collective sentiment has eroded. Not only this, but
the ‘working class’ has become redefined as mere losers - to be morally improved
and fitted to compete in the Great Market Society, culturally disrespected and
humiliated (the ‘chav’ discourse), and socially cleansed from ‘respectable’
neighbourhoods. 

The past thirty years in Britain have seen a regressive development, in which
assumptions of privilege and social closure that once seemed to be on the way
out have subtly reasserted themselves. The cult of the super-rich, the co-option
even of public sector managers into their ranks, the dispersal of the urban poor
through housing and benefit policy, the culture of supposed ‘excellence’ and
exclusivity in the university system, the immunity of the banks from retribution
for their irresponsibility - all are indicators of this reassertion of the
principle of hierarchy.

However, the British model of capitalism - democratic or otherwise - remains a
failing one. The Coalition now offers an improbable remedy - an even fuller
embrace of the market ideology that has brought the country to its present
crisis.

Nothing less than a renaissance of progressive political thinking, in its
broadest dimensions, is now required.

  
[amzn:1910448079]

