Occupy World Street: A Global Roadmap for Radical Economic and Political Reform (March 2012)
============================================================================================

By **Ross Jackson**

Economics has evolved into an irrelevant and abstract tool of the ruling elite,
based on the dubious assumption that natural recourses are without limit and are
there for the sole use of those who control them. While modern economists like
to consider their field to be a branch of science, value-free and independent of
politics, a more realistic view, critical to understanding the crux of the
problem, is that put forward by American economist Hazel Henderson, who
characterises economics as “politics in disguise”. Economics has always served
its political masters.

Traditional economists use growth in the gross domestic product (GPD) as their
measure of economic growth, which the public automatically assumes is the same
as a measure of how well we are doing as a nation this year relative to last
year. But this is not what it measures, and it was never intended to do so.

The problem is that GDP is a measure of total activity. Some items included are
definitely *costs* to society and logically ought to be deducted rather than
added, for example: environmental cleanup (e.g. Chernobyl, Love Canal, Exxon
Valdez, Bhopal, BP in the Gulf of Mexico, Fukushima), highway accidents, prison
costs, costs of treating social problems, effects of global warming (increasing
frequency of violent storms, larger insurance premiums), unemployment costs and
many health costs.

GPD is not an appropriate measure for the effectiveness of economic policy.

The evidence strongly suggests that our global civilisation is undergoing a
collapse that will continue to play out over several decades. In a geological
timescale, the collapse is quite rapid – almost instantaneous - like an
implosion. We are the generation experiencing this implosion in slow motion as
things fall apart around us. The signs are unmistakable, yet people are still
unaware what it happening and try to carry on as best they can in difficult
times.

An organism that thinks only in terms of its own survival will invariably
destroy its environment and, as we are learning for bitter experience, will thus
destroy itself (Fritjof Capra – The Turning Point).

Economics has always been nothing more that politics in disguise (Helen
Henderson – The Politics of the Solar Age).

Indeed, if the objective of someone was to drive our civilisation to ruin,
nothing could be more effective that the invention of the currently dominant
economic system - neoliberalism.

The economic system we choose affects everything in our everyday lives. The
economists’ way of looking at the world goes a long way to explaining how we got
into a situation that is life threatening for our whole civilisation.

Socioeconomic issues were related primarily to ethics and politics through most
of history, while personal gain was not a motive. It was not until somewhat
later in the era of the reductionist Newtonian/Cartesian worldview that gain
first became a determining motive, a market economy became important, and
economics was considered a separate discipline removed from politics, ethics and
social order.

Nevertheless, the highly questionable assumption of personal gain as a motive
has had enormous impact of the economic systems that have evolved since [Adam]
Smith’s time, perhaps because the assumption resonated with that particular
segment of society – the merchant class. Smith’s assumption could be considered
an illustration of the tendency of many economists to draw abstract theories
that are out of touch with reality.

Over 80% of all political debates…ought to be about…the design aspects of the
economic system. What do we tax and what does the tax system encourage or
discourage? What are acceptable working conditions, minimum wages and maximum
wages for employees? Who issues the currency? Who controls interest rates and
the central bank? Who benefits? What are the environmental consequences? Who
owns the land and on what conditions? Who owns the businesses? How are they
regulated? Should centralisation or decentralisation be favoured – urban life or
rural life, private or public transportation? The list goes on and on. To say
that one is ‘against capitalism’ is thus rather an empty statement unless a
particular instance is specified. There is no one interest group that
automatically benefits in a society that commoditises labour. It all depends on
the design. Marxism, for example, can be seen as a particular version of
capitalism with the focus on who owns the means of production.

Since roughly the end of the Second World War the primary goal of almost all
nations has been to maximise economic growth, without the least regard for
either ecological overload or peak oil. Nor does the reigning political
leadership have any regard for whether the net effect of economic growth is
positive or negative.

The IMF and the World Bank have arguably done more harm to more people than any
other pair of non-military institutions in human history (David Korten, When
Corporations Rule the World).

In the early 1980’s, a historical shift in the dominant economic system too
place…This shift was not announced publically, but rather crept into the public
domain surreptitiously…the new policies acquired the name ‘neoliberalism’…a top
down political project with the ideology that fulfilled the wildest dreams of
big business and the wealthiest segment of…society for the unregulated freedom
to operate as they pleased exclusively in their own interests and with little or
no social or environmental considerations to worry about.

Neoliberalism can be seen as an extremist version of neoclassical economics
where the only thing that counts is money. It can also be considered as an
experiment to test Polanyi’s postulate that giving total power to merchants, if
allowed to persist, would “destroy both man and his environment”. After almost
thirty years, the conclusions are quite clear to all but the promoters.

The neoliberal is based on the following principals of organising both national
and international economic relationships in an ideal world: 1) The unrestricted
movement of capital across borders in a currency regime of floating rates
without capital controls; 2) the removal of all restrictions on the free flow of
goods and labour; 3) minimum government regulation of the markets; 4) the
removal of all subsidies, direct or indirect, to domestic industries; and 5) the
privatisation of state enterprises. The theory is that such a regime would be to
the greatest benefit to all world citizens.

According to Susan George, the neoliberals “bought and paid for” their success
in an “absolutely brilliant” piece of ideological and promotional work. The
founded a “huge international network of foundations, institution, research
centres, publications, scholars, writers and public relation hacks to develop,
package and push their ideas and doctrine relentlessly.” Thus, neoliberalism is
not an inevitable historic development as they like to describe it, but “a
totally artificial construct” created by “people with a purpose”. Part of their
strategy is to present the whole phenomenon as inevitable and not subject to
debate.

Economic historian, Paul Bairoch states, “it is difficult to find another case
where the facts so contradict a dominant theory.” The public has been
brainwashed by an ideologically driven flawed theory posing as fact.

‘Markets are self-correcting’ is the greatest lie of all in the neoliberal
‘religion’ and yet is the basis of their demands for deregulation. Every
economist from Adam Smith to John Maynard Keynes knew that markets require
government regulation to function. This is true for *any* economic system.

Financial institutions are the first to run for help from taxpayers when markets
fail, as we saw most recently in 2008. Regulation is especially essential for
neoliberal economics because this particular system is intrinsically unstable
and will lead to recurrent financial crises.

The Neoliberal Project is consciously designed to keep the developing countries
in their ‘proper place’ as suppliers of cheap raw materials and labour – a form
of financial colonialism.

Dr Paul Stevenson of the University of Winnipeg argues that it is the casual
link between capitalism and inequality on the one hand and between inequality
and social problems of the other, that is critical to our understanding the role
of the economic system in social breakdown.

The reality is that without the availability of cheap resources and labour from
the 100 or so developing countries that are financial colonies of the dominant
Western powers, the standard of living in the rich countries could not possibly
be maintained, and the Western elite knows it.

John Grey, professor of European Thought at the London School of Economics puts
it this way: “Those who seek to design a free market on a worldwide scale have
always insisted that a legal framework which defines and entrenches it must be
placed beyond the reach of any democratic legislature.” The WTO and IMF are both
excellent examples of such undemocratic institutions.

With the coming to power of Reagan and Thatcher and the ascendance of the
neoliberals in 1980, everything changed. The subsequent period from 1980 to the
present has been characterised by a deterioration in social cohesiveness,
environmental destruction, increasing stress, increasing criminality, a shift
for solidarity to individualism, a ‘greed is good’ mentality, a dramatic
widening of the gap between the rich and the poor, and last but not least, a
series of major financial crises resulting from the ‘financeialisation’ of the
world economy. All these phenomena fit together as part of the same pattern and
more or less a direct consequence of the ideology of The Neoliberal Project,
which deviated significantly from the ideology of previous economic systems.

In a recent study, former chief economist of the IMF, Raghuram G. Rajan, argues
that increasing inequality was a deeper cause of the 2007-8 financial crisis.
His logic is that lower and middle class incomes were squeezed by neoliberal
economics for three decades. In order to maintain their accustomed standard of
living, this group went into greater debt than was prudent. Indeed, they were
encouraged to do so by the big banks.

The level of inequality in the United Sates just before the 2007-8 crash was the
highest since just before the stock market crash of 1929.

A worldview of separation that sees Nature as a collective of resources to be
exploited with no intrinsic value in itself and humans as separate from Nature
and other humans has created a society that is destroying its natural capital,
the source of all life; it has created an explosive economic system that is in
direct conflict with the fundamental laws of physics and thus has no concept of
limits to growth; it has created increasing inequality, which results in major
social and health problems and decreasing well-being; it has created a
speculative financial system driven by greed that is destabilising and out of
control; and it has crated an explosion of population fuelled by the use in a
few generations of irreplaceable resources that took millions of years for
Nature to produce. None of the above are external to humanity. All are man-made
and can be changed.

The root problem is that not one single country on this planet takes ecological
sustainability seriously. We are globally consuming about 40% more of our
natural capital every year than the ecosystem can replenish. If we want to
survive as a species, then the first step is to acknowledge the facts. Either we
say in collective denial of the facts…or we start taking ecological
sustainability seriously and change our high consumption lifestyles.

Serious sustainability is a policy that a country adopts when it puts ecological
sustainability on top of the list of society’s goals, ahead of economic growth,
ahead of more consumption, ahead of competitiveness, ahead of productivity,
ahead of everything else on the agenda. Anything else is not serious.

‘What we meant by ‘free trade’ was nothing more nor less than, by means of the
great advantage we had enjoyed, to get a monopoly of all their markets for our
manufacturers, and t prevent them, one and all, form ever becoming manufacturing
nations’ (Henry Clay, former American secretary of state).

When the World Trade Organisation (WTO) was formed in 1995, the corporate
friendly rules reversed some of the previously most effective protections of the
environment. One change was to remover the right for a state to ban products
that were considered unacceptable, e.g. DDT, PCBs, leaded gasoline, etc. In many
cases a ban is the only effective way to control pollution…WTO rules can be
torturous to interpret for the uninitiated, as the preamble gives lip-service to
environment protection and sovereignty. However, sixteen years of rulings make
it quite clear that the WTO is anti-environmental, anti-sovereignty and
pro-business in the extreme. It should be clear that all these rules have to be
reversed if sovereign states are to have any real control over their countries,
not least as regards to their economies, the environment and their cultures.

The WTO is based on the principal that everything is allowed into your country
unless it is forbidden. The problem is that protection of the environment is
impossible without protective tariffs to prevent foreign products produced with
lower environment standards from undercutting environmental friendly domestic
production. For this reason, free trade cannot deliver a sustainable future.

A report from the think tank Global Financial Integrity (GFI) in January 2011
documents that developing countries are losing, every year, close to $800
billion on account of what they call ‘illicit financial flows’, much of which
could be stopped by shifting the developing countries’ currency regime from
unrestricted capital flows to capital controls…According to the GFI, the major
sources of illicit financial flows are transfer pricing, tax evasion, bribery,
theft and kickbacks.

Can civil society muster the necessary will and organisational ability to bring
about real change in face of resistance from the ruling elites? Dozens of
authors…have in recent years deplored the current start of world affairs,
written inspiring visions of a better world and documented the un-sustainability
of our current path.

Political leadership at the global level has never been needed more, and yet the
ruling elites are looking the other way, tending to their personal fortunes…they
cling to their privileges, unwilling to act for the common good.

Among NGOs, the implicit assumption of the majority seems to be that the failure
of the international community to take decisive action is simply due to a lack
of awareness of the problems; hence their widespread efforts to raise awareness
of the issues among citizens and their appeals to governments to wake up to the
dangers… this assumption may be quite naïve

*(Excerpt from a message to Andrew Harvey, a widely respected spiritual leader
in the United States, from the CEO of a major Agribusiness Corporation, over
lunch)*


“Most of you that I have recently met truly believe that if the CEOs – like me,
for instance – really knew what harm their corporations polices were doing, they
would rend their Armani suites, fling out their Rolex-wreathed arms, burst into
tears, and change. This is madness and shows how little you dare to know about
what is really going on.

Let me tell you what you are up against. You are up against people like me. I
know exactly what my company is doing and what devastation it is causing to
thousands of lives. I should know; I’m running it and I do not care. I have
decided I want a grand gold-plated lifestyle and the perks and jets and houses
that go with it and I will do anything – bend laws, have people ‘removed’, bribe
local government officials, you name it – to get what I want. I know, too, that
none of my shareholders care a rat’s ass what I do or how I do it, providing I
keep them swimming in cash.

I know too, by the way, that the dark forces I play with are playing with me.
I’m under no illusion that will not someday have to pay a price. Don’t the
French say ‘The devil has no friends’? I’m willing to pay that price in return
for being able to afford this restaurant, in return for being able to ring up
the president of the United States in front of my houseguests to impress them.
Am I getting through to you?”

**Ross Jackson – Occupy World Street: A Global Roadmap for Radical Economic and
Political Reform, published March 22 2012).**

