Paramilitarism And The Assault On Democracy In Haiti
====================================================

By **Jeb Sprague**

The poor living on…Haiti have long been the targets of political violence

One may ask why dominant groups (and governments such as those of the United
States, France and Canada) care – as  they obviously have – about stifling a
pro-democracy movement in so small and poor a country. The simplest – and
bluntest – answer has been provided by Noam Chomsky. He likens the elite
networks that undergird global  capitalism  to a mafia that does not allow even
the smallest and most inconsequential shopkeeper to show open defiance.

Writer-activist Randall Robison recalls how “no one could remember an occasion
where the United States and its  allies had mounted a more comprehensive
campaign to cripple a small, poor country as they had in the case of  democratic
Haiti.

Slavery is alive and well in Haiti. It’s even worse than slavery, really,
because at least with slavery you were  offered some fringe benefits, as far as
housing. In this situation you are offered hard labour and that’s it. If  you
get enough money to buy a machete so you can chop down a few trees and weave
together a hut and pack mud on  the side of it, good for you. If not, tough
luck. They don't provide housing, they don't provide food; they just  use them
for labour.

This country is dying. It is running out for fresh water. Less than 2% of its
natural forested areas remain; as a  consequence, agriculture us devastated.
Though wracked with poverty and disease the population continues to grow  – and
continues to migrate for rural to urban areas, chiefly Port-au-Prince.

If a part of the security forces under Aristide were disastrously infiltrated by
criminal elements with a  deep-seated loathing for democracy, that problem was
greatly, and deliberately, exacerbated after the 2004 coup.  This is part of a
long-term strategy of the leading dominant groups to maintain rightist segments
within Haiti’s  security apparatus that can be mobilised if required in the
future.

The Martelly government’s plan of renewing the military aims to strengthen this
strategy can only lead to more  suffering.

Media outlets and grassroots human rights groups can shine a light on political
violence, working together with  and taking their cue from poor communities and
those who have a long record of struggling for popular democracy  and social
justice.

**Quotes from Brian Leslie’s website**.

“The inability of the Colonists to get power to issue their own money
permanently out of the hands of George III  and the international bankers was
the PRIME reason for the revolutionary war."(Benjamin Franklin)

“If the American people ever allow private banks to control the issuance of
their currencies, first by inflation  and then by deflation, the banks and
corporations that will grow up around them will deprive the people of all  their
prosperity until their children will wake up homeless on the continent their
fathers conquered.”(Thomas  Jefferson – third President of the United States)

“Whoever controls the volume of money in our country is absolute master of all
industry and commerce...and when  you realize that the entire system is very
easily controlled, one way or another, by a few powerful men at the  top, you
will not have to be told how periods of inflation and depression originate.”
(James A. Garfield,  president of the United States (1881) – two weeks before he
was assassinated)

 “If all the bank loans were paid, no one could have a bank deposit, and there
would not be a dollar of coin or  currency in circulation. This is a staggering
thought. We are completely dependent on the commercial banks.  Someone has to
borrow every dollar we have in circulation, cash, or credit… We are absolutely
without a  permanent money system. When one gets a complete grasp of the
picture, the tragic absurdity of our hopeless  situation is almost incredible --
but there it is.” (Robert Hemphill, one-time Credit Manager of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta)

“The modern banking system manufactures money out of nothing. The process is
perhaps the most astounding piece of  sleight of hand that was ever invented.
Banking was conceived in iniquity and born in sin. Bankers own the  Earth. Take
it away from them, but leave them the power to create money, and with the flick
of the pen they will  create enough money to buy it back again... Take this
great power away from them and all great fortunes like  mine will disappear, and
they ought to disappear, for then this would be a better and happier world to
live in.  But if you want to continue to be slaves of the banks and pay the cost
of your own slavery, then let bankers  continue to create money and control
credit.” (Sir Josiah Stamp, Director of the Bank of England from 1928 to  1941,
reputed to be the 2nd richest man in Britain at the time)

“The study of money, above all other fields in economics, is the one in which
complexity is used to disguise  truth or to evade truth, not to reveal it. The
process by which banks create money is so simple the mind is  repelled.” (J K
Galbraith)

“I am afraid that the ordinary citizen will not like to be told that banks can
and do create money... and they  who control the credit of the nation direct the
policy of Governments and hold in the hollow of their hands the  destiny of the
people”  (Reginald McKenna, Chairman of the Board of the Midland Bank, and
former Chancellor of  the Exchequer) "There is nothing more difficult to
execute, nor more dubious of success, nor more dangerous to  administer, than to
introduce a new order of things; for he who introduces it has all those who
profit from the  old order as his enemies, and he has only lukewarm allies in
all those who might profit from the new. This  luke-warmness partly stems from
fear of their adversaries... and partly from the scepticism of men, who do not
truly believe in new things unless they have actually had personal experience of
them." (Machiavelli)

