Political Ponerology: A Science on the Nature of Evil Adjusted for Political Purposes
=====================================================================================
![](/bookimg/politicalponerology.jpg)

It is man’s fate to actively cooperate in giving shape to the fate of society by
two principal means: forming his individual and family life within it, and
becoming active in the sum total of social affairs based on his – hopefully
sufficient – comprehension of what needs to be done, what ought to be done, and
whether or not he can do it. This requires an individual to develop two somewhat
overlapping areas of knowledge about things; his life depends on the quality of
this development, as does his nation and humanity as a whole.


A psychologist’s view of society, even if based only on professional experience,
always places the human individual in the foreground; it then widens the
perspective to include small groups, such as families, and finally societies and
humanity as whole. We must then accept from the outset that an individual’s fate
is significantly dependent upon circumstance.


Only when we can understand a person in relation to his actual internal
contents, not some substituted external label, can we help him along his path to
proper adjustment to social life, which would be to his advantage and would also
assist in the creation of a stable and creative structure of society.


Supported by a proper feel for, and understanding of, psychological qualities,
such a structure would impart high social office to individuals possessing both
full psychological normality, sufficient talent and specific preparation. The
basic collective intelligence of the masses of people would then respect and
support them.


However, there have always been “society pedagogues”, less outstanding but more
numerous, who have become fascinated by their own great ideas, which might,
sometimes, even be true, but are more often constricted or contain the taint of
some hidden pathological thought processes. Such people have always striven to
impose pedagogical methods which would impoverish and deform the development of
individuals’ and societies’ psychological world view; they inflict permanent
harm upon societies, depriving them of universally useful values. By claiming to
act in the name of a more valuable idea, such pedagogues actually undermine the
values they claim and open the door for destructive ideologies.


If various circumstances combine, including a given society’s deficient
psychological worldview, individuals are forced to exercise functions which do
not make full use of his or her talents.


Such an individual then feels cheated and inundated by duties, which prevent him
from achieving self-realization. His thoughts wander from his duties into a
world of fantasy, or into matters that are of greater interest to him; in his
daydream world, he is what he should and deserves to be. Such a person always
knows if his social and professional adjustment has taken a downward direction;
at the same time, however, if he fails to develop a healthy critical faculty
concerning the upper limits of his own talents, his daydreams may “fix on” an
unfair world where “all you need is power”. Revolutionary and radical ideas find
fertile soil among such people in downward social adaptations.


Another type of individual, on the other hand, may achieve an important post
because they belong to privileged social groups or organizations in power while
their talents and skills are not sufficient for their duties, especially the
more difficult problems. Such persons then avoid the problematic and dedicate
themselves to minor matters quite ostentatiously.


In the face of increasing pressures to perform at a level unattainable for them,
and in fear of being discovered as incompetent, they begin to direct attacks
against anyone with greater talent or skill, removing them from appropriate
posts and playing an active role in degrading their social and professional
adjustment.


Upwardly adjusted people thus favour whip-cracking, totalitarian governments,
which would protect their positions.


The most numerous part of populations, whose talents are near average, generally
accepts its modest social position in any country as long as the position
fulfils the indispensable requirements of proper social adjustment and
guarantees an equitable way of life no matter at what level of society the
individual finds their proper fit.


The same people, however, will react with criticism, disrespect, and even
contempt, whenever someone as average as themselves compensates for his
deficiencies by flaunting an upwardly adjusted position. The judgments
pronounced by this sphere of average but sensible people can often be highly
accurate, which can and should be all the more remarkable if we take into
account that said people could not possibly have had sufficient knowledge of
many of the actual problems, be they scientific, technical, or economic.


An experienced politician can rarely assume that the difficulties in the areas
of economics, defence, or international policy will be fully understood by his
constituency.


The same politician should be conscious of the fact that society contains people
who already carry the psychological results of social maladjustment.


Politicians should also be aware that in each society there are people whose
basic intelligence, natural psychological worldview, and moral reasoning have
developed improperly. [\*](#ASIN:B009EGBZ64;LOC:1181)


These people and their networks participate in the genesis of that evil which
spares no nation. This substructure gives birth to dreams of obtaining power and
imposing one’s will upon society, and is quite often actually brought about in
various countries, and during historical times as well.


Some countries with a non-homogeneous population manifest further factors which
operate destructively upon the formation of social structure and the permanent
developmental processes of a society’s psychological world view. Primarily among
these are the racial, ethnic, and cultural differences existing in virtually
every conquest-engendered nation. Memories of former sufferings and contempt for
the vanquished continue to divide the population for centuries.


It thus behoves us to ask: Is good government possible?


It would appear, rather, that the best candidates for development are those
countries whose populations number between ten and twenty million, and where
personal bonds among citizens, and between citizens and their authorities, still
safeguard correct psychological differentiation and natural relationships.
Overly large countries should be divided into smaller organisms enjoying
considerable autonomy, especially as regards cultural and economic matters; they
could afford their citizens a feeling of homeland within which their
personalities could develop and mature.


Society is not an organism subordinating every cell to the good of the whole;
neither is it a colony of insects, where the collective instinct acts like a
dictator. However, it should also avoid being a compendium of egocentric
individuals linked purely by economic interests and legal and formal
organizations.


In reality, many ostensibly contradictory interests, such as individual vs.
collective or those of various social groups and substructures, could be
reconciled if we could be guided by a sufficiently penetrating understanding of
the good of man and society, and if we could overcome the operations of emotions
as well as some more or less primitive doctrines. Such reconciliation, however,
requires transferring the human and social problems in question to a higher
level of understanding and acceptance of the natural laws of life.


After all, a whole series of countries is now dominated by conditions which have
destroyed the structural forms worked out by history and replaced them with
social systems inimical to creative functioning, systems which can only survive
by means of force. We are thus confronted with a great construction project
demanding wide-ranging and well-organized work. The earlier we undertake the
job, the more time we will have to carry it out.


Every person in the span of his life, and particularly during childhood and
youth, assimilates psychological material from others through mental resonance,
identification, imitation, and other communicative means, thereupon transforming
it to build his own personality and worldview. If such material is contaminated
by pathological factors and deformities, personality development shall also be
deformed. The product will be a person unable to understand correctly either
himself and others, normal human relations and morals; he develops
[\*](#ASIN:B009EGBZ64;LOC:1651) into a person who commits evil acts with a poor
feeling of being faulty. Is he really at fault?


For centuries, moralists have been advising us to develop ethics and human
values; they have been searching for the proper intellectual criteria. They have
also respected correctness of reasoning, whose value in this area is
unquestionable. In spite of all their efforts, however, they have been unable to
overcome the many kinds of evil that have scourged humanity for ages and that
are presently taking on unheard-of proportions.


Many thoughtful persons keep asking the same anxious question: how could the
German nation have chosen for a Fuehrer a clownish psychopath who made no bones
about his pathological vision of superman rule? Under his leadership, Germany
then unleashed a second criminal and politically absurd war. During the second
half of this war, highly-trained army officers honourably performed inhuman
orders, senseless from the political and military point of view, issued by a man
whose psychological state corresponded to the routine criteria for being
forcibly committed to a psychiatric hospital.


\*\*\*


Ivan Pavlov comprehended all kinds of paranoid states in a manner similar to
this functional model without being aware of this basic and primary cause. He
nevertheless provided a vivid description of paranoid characters and the
above-mentioned ease with which paranoid individuals suddenly tear away from
factual discipline and proper thought-processes. Those readers of his work on
the subject who are sufficiently familiar with Soviet conditions glean yet
another historical meaning from his little book. Its intent appears obvious. The
author dedicated his work, with no word of inscription, of course, to the chief
model of a paranoid personality: the revolutionary leader Lenin, whom the
scientist knew well. As a good psychologist, Pavlov could predict that he would
not be the object of revenge, since the paranoid mind will block out the
egocentric associations. He was thus able to die a natural death.


Lenin should nevertheless be included with the first and most characteristic
kind of paranoid personality, i.e. most probably due to diencephalic brain
damage. Vassily Grossman describes him more or less as follows (symptoms
identified in brackets): Lenin was always tactful, gentle, and polite,
[asthenization ] but simultaneously characterized by an excessively sharp,
ruthless, and brutal attitude to political opponents [fixation and stereotypia].
He never allowed any possibility that they might be even minimally right, nor
that he might be even minimally wrong [pathological egotism]. He would often
call his opponents hucksters, lackeys, servant-boys, mercenaries, agents, or
Judases bribed for thirty pieces of silver [paramoralisms]. He made no attempt
to persuade his opponents during a dispute. He communicated not with them, but
rather with those witnessing the dispute, in order to ridicule and compromise
his adversaries [spellbinding and of consciousness and its effects]. Sometimes
such witnesses were just a few people, sometimes thousands of delegates to a
congress, sometimes millions worth throngs of newspaper readers [lack of the
self-criticism].


In any society in this world, psychopathic individuals and some of the other
deviant types create a ponerogenically active network of common collusions,
partially estranged from the community of normal people.


One of the most disturbing things about psychopaths that normal people must deal
with is the fact that they very early learn how their personalities can have
traumatizing effects on the personalities of those normal people, and how to
take advantage of this root of terror for purposes of reaching their goals.


It is a common phenomenon for a ponerogenic association or group to contain a
particular ideology, which always justifies its activities and furnishes
motivational propaganda. [\*](#ASIN:B009EGBZ64;LOC:1756)


If such a ponerogenic union could be stripped of its ideology, nothing would
remain except psychological and moral pathology, naked and unattractive.


An ideology of a secondarily ponerogenic association is formed by gradual
adaptation of the primary ideology to functions and goals other than the
original formative ones.


The ideology of unions affected by such degeneration has certain constant
factors regardless of their quality, quantity, or scope of action: namely, the
motivations of a wronged group, radical righting of the wrong, and the higher
values of the individuals who have joined the organization.


In the world full of real injustice and human humiliation, making it conducive
to the formation of an ideology containing the above elements, a union of its
converts may easily succumb to degradation.


The ideology of the proletariat, which aimed at revolutionary restructuring of
the world, was already contaminated by a schizoid deficit in the understanding
of, and trust for, human nature; small wonder, then, that it easily succumbed to
process of typical degeneration in order to nourish and disguise a macrosocial
phenomenon whose basic essence is completely different.


The greater and truer the original ideology, the longer it may be capable of
nourishing and disguising from human criticism that phenomenon which is the
product of the specific degenerative process. In a great and valuable ideology,
the danger for small minds is hidden; they can become the factors of such
preliminary degeneration, which opens the door to invasion by pathological
factors.


When a ponerogenic process encompasses a society’s entire ruling class, or
nation, or when opposition from normal people is stifled – as a result of the
mass character of the phenomenon, or by using spellbinding means and physical
compulsion, including censorship – we are dealing with a macrosocial ponerologic
phenomenon.


Schizoid characters aim to impose their own conceptual world upon other people
or social groups, using relatively controlled pathological egotism and the
exceptional tenacity derived from their persistent nature. They are thus
eventually able to overpower another individual’s personality, which causes the
latter’s behavior to turn desperately illogical. They may also exert a similar
influence upon the group of people they have joined. They are psychological
loners who then begin to feel better in some human organization, wherein they
become zealots for some ideology, religious bigots, materialists, or adherents
of an ideology with satanic features. If their activities consist of direct
contact on a small social scale, their acquaintances generally just consider
them to be eccentric, which limits their ponerogenic role. However, if they
manage to hide their own personality behind the written word, their influence
may poison the minds of society on a wide scale and for a long time. The
conviction that Karl Marx is the best example of this is correct, as he was the
best-known figure of that kind. Frostig, a psychiatrist of the old school,
included Engels and others into a category he called “bearded schizoidal
fanatics”.


Humanists are prepared to understand that era and its legacy within categories
characterized by their own traditions. They search for societal, ideational, and
moral causes for known phenomena. Such an explanation, however, can never
constitute the whole truth, since it ignores the biological factors, which
participated in the genesis of the phenomena. Schizoidia is the most frequent
factor, albeit not the only one. In spite of the fact that the writings of
schizoidal authors contain the above described deficiency, or even an openly
formulated schizoidal declaration which constitutes sufficient warning to
specialists, the average reader accepts them not as a view of reality warped by
this anomaly, but rather as an idea to which he should consider seriously based
on his convictions and his reason. That is the first mistake.


The passage of time and bitter experience has unfortunately not prevented this
characteristic misunderstanding born of schizoid nineteenth-century creativity,
with Marx’s works at the fore, from affecting people and depriving them of their
common sense.


It should be noted that a great ideology with mesmerizing values can also easily
deprive people of the capacity for self-critical control over their behavior.
The adherents of such ideas tend to lose sight of the fact that the means used,
not just the end, will be decisive for the result of their activities. Whenever
they reach for overly radical methods of action, still convinced that they are
serving their idea, they are not aware that their goal has already changed. The
principle “the end justifies the means” opens the door to a different kind of
person for whom a great idea is useful for purposes of liberating themselves
from the uncomfortable pressure of normal human custom. Every great ideology
thus contains danger, especially for small minds. Therefore, every great social
movement and its ideology can become a host upon which some pathocracy initiates
its parasitic life.


\*\*\*


If a nucleus of this macro-social pathological phenomenon already exists in the
world, always cloaking its true quality behind an ideological mask of some
political system, it irradiates into other nations via coded news difficult for
normal people to understand, but easy to read for psychopathic individuals.


Whether directly or indirectly, i.e. by means of deviant “agents”, this call of
pathocracy, once appropriately “decked-out”, reaches a significantly wider
circle of people, including both individuals with various psychological
deviations and those who are frustrated, deprived of the opportunity to earn an
education and make use of their talents, physically or morally injured, or
simply primitive. The scope of the response to this call may vary in proportion,
but nowhere will it represent the majority.


Various nations’ different degrees of resistance to this activity depend upon
many factors, such as prosperity and its equitable distribution, the society’s
educational level (especially that of the poorer classes), the proportion of
participation of individuals who are primitive or have various deviations, and
the current phase of the hysteroidal cycle.


In countries just emerging from primeval conditions and lacking political
experience, an appropriately elaborated revolutionary doctrine reaches its
society’s autonomous substratum and finds people who treat it like ideational
reality.


People who have become accustomed to revolutionary catchwords no longer watch to
make sure that whoever expounds such an ideology is a truly sincere adherent,
and not just someone using the mask of ideology to conceal other motives derived
from his deviant personality.


Any war waged with psychological weapons costs only a fraction as much as
classical warfare, but it does have a cost, especially when it is being waged
simultaneously in many countries throughout the world.


Whenever a society contains serious social problems, there will also be some
group of sensible people striving to improve the social situation by means of
energetic reforms, so as to eliminate the cause of social tension.


Such reformers and moralists must therefore be consistently neutralized by means
of liberal or conservative positions and appropriately suggestive catchwords and
paramoralisms…


Psychological warfare strategists must decide rather early on which ideology
would be most efficient in a particular country because of its adaptability to
said nation’s traditions. After all, the appropriately adapted ideology must
perform the function of a Trojan horse, transporting pathocracy into the
country.


Assistance must then be given so groups of conspirators adhering to the
concocted ideology can stage a coup d’état, whereupon an iron-fisted government
is installed.


Conflict progressively increases, especially when wide circles of society begin
to doubt whether those people allegedly acting in the name of some great
ideology do in fact believe in it.


Ever-increasing control is thus necessary until full pathocracy can be achieved.


The attitude of understanding even one’s enemies is the most difficult for us
humans. Moral condemnation proves to be an obstacle along the path toward curing
the world of this disease.


Pathocratic leadership believes that it can achieve a state wherein those
“other” people’s minds become dependent by means of the effects of their
personality, perfidious pedagogical means, the means of mass-disinformation, and
psychological terror; such faith has a basic meaning for them. In their
conceptual world, pathocrats consider it virtually self-evident that the
“others” should accept their obvious, realistic, and simple way of apprehending
reality.


Personality development is impoverished, particularly regarding the more subtle
values widely accepted in societies. We observe the characteristic lack of
respect for one’s own organism and the voice of nature and instinct, accompanied
by brutalization of feelings and customs, to be explained away by the excuse of
injustice.


If a person with a normal instinctive substratum and basic intelligence has
already heard and read about such a system of ruthless autocratic rule “based on
a fanatical ideology”, he feels he has already formed an opinion on the subject.
However, direct confrontation with the phenomenon will inevitably produce in him
the feeling of intellectual helplessness. All his prior imaginings prove to be
virtually useless; they explain next to nothing.


The author and many others learned a good deal about the psychology of this
macro-social phenomenon during compulsory indoctrinational schooling.


The history of mankind has been a history of wars, which makes it lack eternal
meaning in our eyes. A new great war would represent the triumph of madness over
the nations’ will to live.


International reason must therefore prevail, reinforced by the newly discovered
moral values and naturalistic science concerning the causes and genesis of evil.


If societies are furnished an understanding of the pathological nature of evil,
they will be able to effect concerted action based on moral and naturalistic
criteria.


We may also hope that using such a weapon will help end centuries of warfare
among nations.


The design and construction of a new social system should also be based upon
proper distinctions of reality and should receive appropriate elaboration in
many details in order to prove effective in execution and action. This will
require abandoning some traditional customs of political life, which allowed
human emotions and egoism to play too great a role.


Regaining the right to decide one’s own fate, particularly for a nation now
affected by pathocracy, would be improvisation, which is expensive and
dangerous.


Wherever old social systems created by historical processes have been almost
totally destroyed by the introduction of state capitalism and the development of
pathocracy, that nation’s social and psychological structure has been
obliterated. The replacement is a pathological structure reaching into every
corner of a country, causing all areas of life to degenerate and become
unproductive.


While Lobaczewski offers us, perhaps for the first time in recorded history, the
key to understanding this process, for coming to grips with the true nature of
human evil in our world, it is obvious that the key will only unlock more horror
and suffering if it is held by those types described in the pages of this book.
Only if normal people, the billions of normal people of conscience in our world,
can be made aware of the real threat we face and can learn to immunize
themselves, do we stand a chance of breaking the cycle.


In accordance to my experience as a clinical psychologist and researcher of the
nature of evil in the domains of psychopathology, it appears to me that nearly
half of the pathologic factors taking part in the processes of the generation of
evil – what I call Ponerogenesis – are the results of various kinds of brain
tissue lesions.


The main task seems to me to be distinguishing of anomalies caused by damage in
brain tissue from those transmitted by heredity.


The ‘average’ member of the dominant five per cent sees no reason why he should
not be rich and famous too. He experiences anger and frustration at his lack of
‘primacy’, and is willing to consider unorthodox methods of elbowing his way to
the fore. This clearly explains a great deal about the rising levels of crime
and violence in our society.


Ponerology was born in the crucible of attempts to understand, scientifically,
macro-social phenomenon of what can only be called extreme and excessive evil:
Fascism and Soviet Communism.


I was aware that such similar phenomena have appeared in the history of mankind
again and again, in various scales, under various historical conditions, and
always carried into society, like a Trojan Horse, enrobed in the ideology of
some idealistic heterogeneous social movement. This is still true in the present
time.


New ways and methods of combating evil in society are needed rather than just a
scheme of punishments. More effective means of dealing with the genesis of evil
[\*](#ASIN:B009EGBZ64;LOC:5511) must be found!


A basic knowledge of the true nature of evil – that it can be scientifically
elaborated – would make people more circumspect in their engagements with other
people and life in general.

[amzn:B009EGBZ64]

