Rethinking Community Practice: developing transformative neighbourhoods (2013)
==============================================================================

By **Gabriel Chanon and Colin Miller**

Not everyone wants to be or need to be involved in local affairs, but there is
plenty of appetite for involvement in most places.


Economic pressures demand that public services yield maximum cost-benefit, and
the imperative of social harmony – if not simple social justice – demands that
rampant inequality is overcome.


The role of community groups is fundamental to the whole question of community
involvement and practice. Community activity is about people doing things
together, and as soon as people do such things over a period of time, meeting
repeatedly, they take on some sort of group existence. Groups with a long-term
existence are the basic vehicles of community activity…Collectively they can be
described as the community sector, and they form the largest part of the
voluntary sector.


Social policies both local and national often invoke community involvement
without appearing to understand how fundamental community groups are to the life
of a community.


Radical theory holds that the state and its agencies are themselves the primary
source of poverty and inequality that community work is fighting against. If
this is the case then tension is not only unavoidable but irremediable. There
can be no successful community practice under such conditions.


It is more realistic to see the state in a democratic society as a mechanism for
decision-making, which must respond to different, often conflicting, opinions
and interests, and this view will reveal more options for change.


If community work was only a movement of social protest, governments would never
employ community workers. Repressive governments would stamp on it and
permissive governments would tolerate it, but no government would deliberately
allocate tax revenues to provide it…They realise that in order to meet citizens
needs without creating dependency, and to do so with maximum economy and
effectiveness, one of the components that is universally needed is a
participatory ethos in which users’ voices are heard, their influence is
effective and co-production is facilitated.


Most of the best things in capitalist society other than productivity itself are
created in some degree of criticism of the great economic engine of the system
and actually preserve it by combating its inherent excesses. Out of correctives
to the present wild instability of capitalism, political regimes may arise which
not only stabilise and discipline capitalism to some degree but which ise
community practice in a more fundamental way, to ensure the health of civil
society at the roots.


The issue that confronts us now is to discover how far the methods and lessons
learnt from past generations will apply when more neighbourhoods are at risk
from decline, but the national framework of support, and the resources of local
public services, has been dramatically shrunk.


It should be remembered…that the third sector is in fact a yoking together of
two considerably different sectors: on one hand, professionally run charities
and non-profit organisations; and on the other hand self-sustaining community
groups, the community sector.


There is a long way to go before there are broadly dynamic, co-operative,
co-productive relationships between statutory bodies and the bulk of the local
community sector.


[T]he potential for neighbourhoods to improve their conditions is reliant on
policy frameworks at local, regional and national level…But the ultimate
determining factor is what is done in the neighbourhood itself by the residents
and the local public service workers together. This is not something that can be
done by residents in isolation. Erosion of mainstream public services would make
to increasingly difficult for neighbourhoods to function, let alone transform
themselves.


The key roles of national governments regarding strengthening communities are:
(1) to recognise that is a vital national issue which needs strategic support
but cannot be closely directed from national level; and (2) to ensure that there
are effective resources and frameworks available through the policy delivery
chain, and in particular though policy making and resourcing in local
authorities, local health agencies, police and other bodies.


The best hope of making a significant difference it the wellbeing of a local
population is to mobilise the fragments of latent and quasi community practice
within the area around a small specialist team which can coordinate and
strengthen this aspect if their varied roles. This amounts to some from of
neighbourhood partnership. To work well, such a partnership must also mobilise
and embody strong leadership from residents.

