Rise of the Network Society (The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture Volume I)
=========================================================================================

By **Manuel Castells**

![](/bookimg/riseofnetworksocietythe.jpg)

The information technology revolution was instrumental in allowing the
implementation of a fundamental process of restructuring of the capitalist
system from the 1980s onwards. In the process, this technological revolution was
itself shaped, in its development and manifestations, by the logic and interests
of advanced capitalism, without being reducible to the expression of such
interests.


Soviet statism failed in its attempt, to the point of collapsing the whole
system, to a large extent because of the incapacity of statism to assimilate and
use the principles of informationalism embodied in new information technologies.


Chinese statism seemed to succeed by shifting from statism to stateled
capitalism and integration in global economic networks, actually becoming closer
to the developmental state model of East Asian capitalism than to the “socialism
with Chinese characteristics” of official ideology.


This book studies the emergence of a new social structure, manifested in various
forms, depending on the diversity of cultures and institutions throughout the
planet. This new social structure is associated with the emergence of a new mode
of development, informationalism, historically shaped by the restructuring of
the capitalist mode of production towards the end of the twentieth century.


Capitalism is oriented toward profit-maximizing, that is, toward increasing the
amount of surplus appropriated by capital on the basis of the private control
over the means of production and circulation. Statism is (was?) oriented toward
power-maximizing, that is, toward increasing the military and ideological
capacity of the political apparatus for imposing its goals on a greater number
of subjects and at deeper levels of their consciousness.


In the new, informational mode of development the source of productivity lies in
the technology of knowledge generation, information processing, and symbol
communication.


What is specific to the informational mode of development is the action of
knowledge upon knowledge itself as the main source of productivity.


Restructuring proceeded on the basis of the political defeat of organized labor
in major capitalist countries, and the acceptance of a common economic
discipline by countries of the OECD area.


While capitalism’s restructuring and the diffusion of informationalism were
inseparable processes on a global scale, societies did act/react differently to
such processes, according to the specificity of their history, culture, and
institutions. Thus, to some extent it would be improper to refer to an
“informational society,” which would imply the homogeneity of social forms
everywhere under the new system.


Thus, all societies are affected by capitalism and informationalism, and many
societies (certainly all major societies) are already informational,31 although
of different kinds, in different settings, and with specific
cultural/institutional expressions.


“Gradualism,” wrote paleontologist Stephen J. Gould, “the idea that all change
must be smooth, slow, and steady, was never read from the rocks. It represented
a common cultural bias, in part a response of nineteenth century liberalism to a
world in revolution. But it continues to colour our supposedly objective reading
of life’s history… The history of life, as I read it, is a series of stable
states, punctuated at rare intervals by major events that occur with great
rapidity and help to establish the next stable era.”1 My starting-point, and I
am not alone in this assumption, is that, at the end of the twentieth century,
we lived through one of these rare intervals in history. An interval
characterized by the transformation of our “material culture” by the works of a
new technological paradigm organized around information technologies.


The creation and development of the Internet in the last three decades on the
twentieth century resulted from a unique blending of military strategy, big
science cooperation, technological entrepreneurship, and countercultural
innovation.


The networking logic epitomized by the Internet became applicable to every
domain of activity, to every context, and to every location that could be
electronically connected.


Based on these technologies, computer scientists envisage the possibility of
computing environments where billions of microscopic information-processing
devices will be spread everywhere “like pigment in the wall paint.” If so, then
computer networks will be, materially speaking, the fabric of our lives.


The rise of the network society, which I shall attempt to analyze in the
following chapters of this volume, cannot be understood without the interaction
between these two relatively autonomous trends: the development of new
information technologies and the old society’s attempt to retool itself by using
the power of technology to serve the technology of power.


In sum, the information technology paradigm does not evolve toward its closure
as a system, but toward its openness as a multi-edged network. It is powerful
and imposing in its materiality, but adaptive and open-ended in its historical
development. Comprehensiveness, complexity, and networking are its decisive
qualities.


It is indeed a force, probably more than ever under the current technological
paradigm that penetrates the core of life and mind.105 But its actual deployment
in the realm of conscious social action, and the complex matrix of interaction
between the technological forces unleashed by our species, and the species
itself, are matters of inquiry rather than of fate.


A new economy emerged in the last quarter of the twentieth century on a
worldwide scale. I call it informational, global, and networked to identify its
fundamental distinctive features and to emphasize their intertwining.


This new economy emerged in the last quarter of the twentieth century because
the information technology revolution provided the indispensable, material basis
for its creation.


Productivity drives economic progress. It is by increasing the yields of output
per unit of input over time that humankind eventually mastered the forces of
nature and, in the process, shaped itself as culture. No wonder that the debate
over the sources of productivity is the cornerstone of classical political
economy, from the Physiocrats to Marx, via Ricardo, and remains at the forefront
of that dwindling stream of economic theory still concerned with the real
economy.


A complex picture emerges regarding the process of historical development of the
new informational economy. This complexity explains why highly aggregated
statistical data cannot reflect directly the extent and pace of economic
transformation under the impact of technological change.


What has changed is not the kind of activities humankind is engaged in, but its
technological ability to use as a direct productive force what distinguishes our
species as a biological oddity: its superior capacity to process symbols.


A critical development in financial globalization is the staggering volume of
currency trading, which conditions the exchange rate between national
currencies, decisively undermining governments’ autonomy in monetary and fiscal
policies.


International trade was, historically, the main link between national economies.
However, its relative importance in the current process of globalization is less
than that of financial integration, and that of internationalization of foreign
direct investment and production.


In the late 1990s, on the initiative of the United States government, the WTO
focused its activity on liberalizing trade in services, and on reaching an
agreement on trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIPS). On
both grounds, it signaled the strategic connection between the new stage of
globalization and the informational economy.


In sum, the process of regionalization of the global economy has largely
dissolved, in favour of a multilayered, multi-networked structure of trade
patterns, which cannot be apprehended by using the categories of countries as
units of trade and competition. Indeed, markets for goods and services are
becoming increasingly globalized. But the actual trading units are not
countries, but firms, and networks of firms.


The debate over the regionalization of the global economy denotes, however, a
very important matter: the role of governments and international institutions in
the process of globalization. Networks of firms, trading in the global market,
are only one part of the story.


Yet the complexity of interaction between government strategies and trade
competition cannot be understood under the simplistic notions of regionalization
and trading blocs.


Global production of goods and services, increasingly, is not performed by
multinational corporations, but by transnational production networks, of which
multinational corporations are an essential component, yet a component which
could not operate without the rest of the network.


There is, increasingly, a process of globalization of specialty labor. That is,
not only highly skilled labour, but labour which becomes in exceptionally high
demand around the world and, therefore, will not follow the usual rules in terms
of immigration laws, wages, or working conditions. This is the case for
high-level professional labor: top business managers, financial analysts,
advanced services consultants, scientists and engineers, computer programmers,
biotechnologists, and the like. But it is also the case for artists, designers,
performers, sports stars, spiritual gurus, political consultants, and
professional criminals.


While the informational economy shapes the entire planet, and in this sense it
is indeed global, most people in the planet do not work for or buy from the
informational, global economy. Yet all economic and social processes do relate
to the structurally dominant logic of such an economy.


A global economy, in the precise sense defined in this chapter, emerged in the
last years of the twentieth century.110 It resulted from the restructuring of
firms and financial markets in the wake of the 1970s’ crisis. It expanded by
using new information and communication technologies. It was made possible, and
by and large induced, by deliberate government policies. The global economy was
not created by markets, but by the interaction between markets and governments
and international financial institutions acting on behalf of markets – or of
their notion of what markets ought to be.


The decisive agents in setting up a new, global economy were governments, and,
particularly, the governments of the wealthiest countries, the G-7, and their
ancillary international institutions, the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank, and the World Trade Organization. Three interrelated policies created the
foundations for globalization: deregulation of domestic economic activity
(starting with financial markets); liberalization of international trade and
investment; and privatization of publicly controlled companies (often sold to
foreign investors). These policies began in the United States in the mid-1970s,
and in Britain in the early 1980s, spread throughout the European Union in the
1980s, and became the dominant policy in most countries in the world, and the
common standard in the international economic system, in the 1990s.


Once such a network is constituted, any node that disconnects itself is simply
bypassed, and resources (capital, information, technology, goods, services,
skilled labour) continue to flow in the rest of the network.


Thus, within the value system of productivism/consumerism, there is no
individual alternative for countries, firms, or people. Barring a catastrophic
meltdown of the financial market, or opting out by people following completely
different values, the process of globalization is set, and it accelerates over
time.


\*\*\*


My hypothesis is that, as the process of globalization progresses,
organizational forms evolve from multinational enterprises to international
networks, actually bypassing the so-called “transnationals” that belong more to
the world of mythical representation (or self-serving image-making by management
consultants) than to the institutionally bounded realities of the world economy.


Thus, when societies massively destroy manufacturing jobs in a short period of
time, instead of gradually phasing the industrial transformation, it is not
necessarily because they are more advanced, but because they follow specific
policies and strategies that are based in their cultural, social, and political
backdrop. And the options taken to conduct the transformation of the national
economy and of the labour force have profound consequences for the evolution of
the occupational structure that provides the foundations for the new class
system of the informational society.


If Japanese manufacturers produce many of the cars consumed by the American
market and many of the chips consumed in Europe, we are not just witnessing the
demise of American or British manufacturing, but the impact on the employment
structure of each country of the division of labour among different types of
informational societies.


The implications of such an observation for the theory of informationalism are
far-reaching: the unit of analysis to comprehend the new society will
necessarily have to change. The focus of the theory must shift to a comparative
paradigm able to explain at the same time the sharing of technology, the
interdependence of the economy, and the variations of history in the
determination of an employment structure spread across national boundaries.


The labour force located in different countries depends on the division of
labour between distinct functions and strategies of these multinational
networks. Thus, most of the labour force does not circulate in the network, but
becomes dependent on the function, evolution, and behaviour of other segments in
the network.


The pressures toward greater flexibility of the labour market and toward the
reversal of the welfare state in Western Europe come less from the pressures
derived from East Asia than from the comparison with the United States.


Lean production, downsizing, restructuring, consolidation, and flexible
management practices are induced and made possible by the intertwined impact of
economic globalization and diffusion of information technologies.


The prevailing model for labour in the new, information-based economy is that of
a core labour force, formed by information-based managers and by those whom
Reich calls “symbolic analysts,” and a disposable labour force that can be
automated and/or hired/fired/offshored, depending upon market demand and labour
costs.


This transformation has shaken our institutions, inducing a crisis in the
relationship between work and society.


While America is an extreme case of income inequality and declining real wages
among the industrialized nations, its evolution is significant because it does
represent the flexible labour market model at which most European nations, and
certainly European firms, are aiming.


Labour unions, the main obstacle to one-sided restructuring strategy, were
weakened by their inability to adapt to representing new kinds of workers
(women, youth, immigrants), to acting in new workplaces (private sector offices,
high-technology industries), and to functioning in the new forms of organization
(the network enterprise on a global scale).


Thus, on the surface, societies were/are becoming dualised, with a substantial
top and a substantial bottom growing at both ends of the occupational structure,
so shrinking the middle, at a pace and in a proportion that depend upon each
country’s position in the international division of labour and on its political
climate. But down in the deep of the nascent social structure, a more
fundamental process has been triggered by informational work: the disaggregation
of labour, ushering in the network society.


Internet-mediated communication is too recent a social phenomenon to have
provided the opportunity for scholarly research to reach firm conclusions on its
social meaning.


In the international arena, new trans-border social movements, rising to defend
women’s causes, human rights, environmental preservation, and political
democracy, are making the Internet an essential tool for disseminating
information, organizing, and mobilizing.


Every cultural expression, from the worst to the best, from the most elitist to
the most popular, comes together in this digital universe that links up in a
giant, non-historical hypertext, past, present, and future manifestations of the
communicative mind. By so doing, they construct a new symbolic environment. They
make virtuality our reality.


The new global economy and the emerging informational society have indeed a new
spatial form, which develops in a variety of social and geographical contexts:
mega-cities.


They are the nodes of the global economy, concentrating the directional,
productive, and managerial upper functions all over the planet: the control of
the media; the real politics of power; and the symbolic capacity to create and
diffuse messages.


They also function as magnets for their hinterlands; that is, the whole country
or regional area where they are located. Mega-cities cannot be seen only in
terms of their size, but as a function of their gravitational power toward major
regions of the world.


Mega-cities articulate the global economy, link up the informational networks,
and concentrate the world’s power.


Yet what is most significant about mega-cities is that they are connected
externally to global networks and to segments of their own countries, while
internally disconnecting local populations that are either functionally
unnecessary or socially disruptive.


The more a society is democratic in its institutions, the more the elites have
to become clearly distinct from the populace, so avoiding the excessive
penetration of political representatives into the inner world of strategic
decision- making.


For the first time in history, a unified global capital market, working in real
time, has emerged. The explanation, and the real issue, of the phenomenal volume
of trans-border financial flows, lies in the speed of the transactions. The same
capital is shuttled back and forth between economies in a matter of hours,
minutes, and sometimes seconds. Favoured by deregulation, disintermediation, and
the opening of domestic financial markets, powerful computer programs and
skilful financial analysts/computer wizards, sitting at the global nodes of a
selective telecommunications network, play games, literally, with billions of
dollars. The main card room in this electronic casino is the currency market,
which has exploded in the past decade, taking advantage of floating exchange
rates. [Trading in foreign exchange markets averaged $5.3 trillion per day in
April 2013. \*] These global gamblers are not obscure speculators, but major
investment banks, pension funds, multinational corporations (of course including
manufacturing corporations), and mutual funds organized precisely for the sake
of financial manipulation. François Chesnais identified about 50 major players
in the global financial markets. Yet, as argued above, once turbulences are
generated in the market, flows take over, as central banks have repeatedly
learned to their heavy cost. Time is critical to the profit making of the whole
system. It is the speed of the transaction, sometimes automatically
pre-programmed in the computer to make quasi-instantaneous decisions, that
generates the gain – or the loss. But it is also the time circularity of the
process, a relentless sequence of buying and selling that characterizes the
system. The architecture of global finance is indeed constructed around time
zones, with London, New York, and Tokyo anchoring the three shifts of capital,
and a number of financial maverick centres working on the slight discrepancies
between market values at their opening and closing times. Furthermore, a
significant and growing number of financial transactions are based on making
value out of the capture of future time in present transactions, as in the
futures, options, and other derivative capital markets. Together these new
financial products dramatically increase the mass of nominal capital vis-à-vis
bank deposits and assets, so that it can be said properly that time creates
money, as everybody bets on and with future money anticipated in computer
projections. The very process of marketing future development affects these
developments, so that the time frame of capital is constantly dissolved into its
present manipulation after being given a fictitious value for the purpose of
monetizing it. Thus capital not only compresses time: it absorbs it, and lives
out of (that is, generates rent) its digested seconds and years.


The material consequences of this apparently abstract digression on time and
capital are increasingly felt in economies and daily lives around the world:
recurrent monetary crises, ushering in an era of structural economic instability
and actually jeopardizing European integration; the inability of capital
investment to anticipate the future, thus undermining incentives for productive
investment; the wrecking of companies, and of their jobs, regardless of
performance because of sudden, unforeseen changes in the financial environment
in which they operate; the increasing gap between profits in the production of
goods and services and rents generated in the sphere of circulation, thus
shifting an increasing share of world savings to financial gambling; the growing
risks for pension funds and private insurance liabilities, thus introducing a
question mark over the hard-bought security of working people around the world;
the dependence of entire economies, and particularly those of developing
countries, on movements of capital largely determined by subjective perception
and speculative turbulence; the destruction in the collective experience of
societies of the deferred-gratification pattern of behaviour, in favour of the
“quick buck” common ideology, emphasizing individual gambling with life and the
economy; and the fundamental damage to the social perception of the
correspondence between production and reward, work and meaning, ethics and
wealth.


The annihilation and manipulation of time by electronically managed global
capital markets are at the source of new forms of devastating economic crises,
looming into the twenty-first century.


\*\*\*


Time is managed as a resource, not under the linear, chronological manner of
mass production, but as a differential factor with reference to the temporality
of other firms, networks, processes, or products. Only the networked form of
organization and increasingly powerful and mobile information-processing
machines are able to ensure the flexible management of time as the new frontier
of high-performance firms.32 Under such conditions time is not only compressed:
it is processed.


Thus, the real challenge of the new relationship between work and technology
does not concern mass unemployment, as I tried to discuss in chapter 4, but the
overall shortening of life working time for a substantial proportion of the
population. Unless the basis of calculation for social benefits is modified
through a new social contract, the shrinkage of valuable working time and the
accelerated obsolescence of labour will bring to an end the institutions of
social solidarity, ushering in the age wars.


Our exploration of emergent social structures across domains of human activity
and experience leads to an over-arching conclusion: as an historical trend,
dominant functions and processes in the Information Age are increasingly
organized around networks. Networks constitute the new social morphology of our
societies, and the diffusion of networking logic substantially modifies the
operation and outcomes in processes of production, experience, power, and
culture.


The inclusion/exclusion in networks, and the architecture of relationships
between networks, enacted by light-speed-operating information technologies,
configure dominant processes and functions in our societies.


A network-based social structure is a highly dynamic, open system, susceptible
to innovating without threatening its balance.


Switches connecting the networks (for example, financial flows taking control of
media empires that influence political processes) are the privileged instruments
of power.


So observations and analyses presented in this volume seem to indicate that the
new economy is organized around global networks of capital, management, and
information, whose access to technological know-how is at the roots of
productivity and competitiveness.


The network society, in its various institutional expressions, is, for the time
being, a capitalist society. Furthermore, for the first time in history, the
capitalist mode of production shapes social relationships over the entire
planet. But this brand of capitalism is profoundly different from its historical
predecessors.


In this electronically operated global casino specific capitals boom or bust,
settling the fate of corporations, household savings, national currencies, and
regional economies. The net result sums to zero: the losers pay for the winners.
But who are the winners and the losers changes by the year, the month, the day,
the second, and permeates down to the world of firms, jobs, salaries, taxes, and
public services – to the world of what is sometimes called “the real economy,”
and of what I would be tempted to call the “unreal economy,” since in the age of
networked capitalism the fundamental reality, where money is made and lost,
invested or saved, is in the financial sphere.


Thus, capital is either global or becomes global to enter the accumulation
process in the electronically networked economy.


There is not, sociologically and economically, such a thing as a global
capitalist class. But there is an integrated, global capital network, whose
movements and variable logic ultimately determines economies and influence
societies.


They play their competing, or converging, strategies by and through the circuits
of this global network, and so they are ultimately dependent upon the non-human
capitalist logic of an electronically operated, random processing of
information. [\*](#ASIN:B005UQCVXI;LOC:11809)


But, if work, workers, and working classes exist, and even expand, around the
world, the social relationships between capital and labour are profoundly
transformed.


Labour is disaggregated in its performance, fragmented in its organization,
diversified in its existence, divided in its collective action.


Labour loses its collective identity, becomes increasingly individualized in its
capacities, in its working conditions, and in its interests and projects. Who
are the owners, who the producers, who the managers, and who the servants
becomes increasingly blurred in a production system of variable geometry, of
teamwork, of networking, outsourcing, and subcontracting.


Capital tends to escape in its hyperspace of pure circulation, while labour
dissolves its collective entity into an infinite variation of individual
existences.


Because information and communication circulate primarily through the
diversified, yet comprehensive media system, politics becomes increasingly
played out in the space of media.


The fact that politics has to be framed in the language of electronically based
media has profound consequences for the characteristics, organization, and goals
of political processes, political actors, and political institutions.


The social construction of new dominant forms of space and time develops a
meta-network that switches off non-essential functions, subordinate social
groups, and devalued territories. By so doing, infinite social distance is
created between this meta-network and most individuals, activities, and locales
around the world.


In a broader historical perspective, the network society represents a
qualitative change in the human experience.


We are just entering a new stage in which culture refers to culture, having
superseded nature to the point that nature is artificially revived (“preserved”)
as a cultural form: this is in fact the meaning of the environmental movement,
to reconstruct nature as an ideal cultural form.


It is the beginning of a new existence, and indeed the beginning of a new age,
the Information Age, marked [\*](#ASIN:B005UQCVXI;LOC:1782900) by the autonomy
of culture vis-à-vis the material bases of our existence. But this is not
necessarily an exhilarating moment. Because, alone at last in our human world,
we shall have to look at ourselves in the mirror of historical reality. And we
may not like the vision.

[amzn:B005UQCVXI]

