S.O.S. Alternatives to Capitalism (World Changing)
==================================================

By **Richard Swift**

![](/bookimg/sosalternativestocapitalismworld.jpg)

We need serious and widespread discussion of Swift’s central thesis that a
reinvigorated left politics focused on policies such as degrowth, control of
capital, and a guaranteed income can lead us toward the overarching goal of a
just, compassionate, ecologically sound and democratically self-managed
post-capitalist society.’ John P Clark, Professor of Philosophy at Loyola
University, New Orleans, and author of The Impossible Community.

‘Our current economic model is not only waging war on workers, on communities,
on public services and social safety nets. It’s waging war on the life-support
systems of the planet itself – the conditions for life on earth.’

It is ‘pretty obvious that both inequality and growth are built into the very
DNA of the capitalist system. Capitalism can never be about selling us less,
living in a more modest way or reducing inequalities.’

‘The post-growth alternative to capitalism needs to be different in its very
language. It must move beyond earlier preoccupations with class struggle, while
maintaining its commitments to equality and democracy.’

It is pretty obvious that our world is in trouble.

It is more the place occupied by the human species that is in question as we
destroy the ecological conditions necessary to support us in the numbers and
style to which we have grown accustomed. That’s right – we are doing it to
ourselves. Species suicide.

We think we are OK but the evidence is mounting that we are not.

When our best natures aren't suppressed, we can be loving, funny, carefree,
courageous, thoughtful and capable of wondrous acts of generosity.

So what we need to do is to organize the world in such a way as to encourage our
better selves and discourage our narrow-minded and nasty side. Our current
system of capital accumulation (known as corporate capitalism) does just the
opposite.

It has reached the point where t is easier to think of the end of the world than
the end of capitalism. [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:164)

The purpose of this book is to tease out what such genuine alternatives to
capitalism might look like.

In all periods of history from the Paleolithic through the Neolithic right up to
the Late Feudal, people enjoyed their food, loved their children, thought about
the universe and its meaning and tried to live according to their values.

The point is not that these were the pre-capitalist ‘good old days’ but that,
until relatively recently, life was different from that which we experience in
today’s market and commodity-dominated society. Sometimes it was better;
sometimes worse.

It is the diversity of real possibility that we are losing under the
homogenizing influence of corporate capitalism.

Today’s advocates of an alternative to wasteful capitalism have their roots in
past human experiences. They can all find voices of past dissent that still
speak to them and offer possibilities of roads not yet taken.

Even in the face of the obvious failures of the current phase of
finance-dominated capitalism, the political class seems to have no ability (or
even willingness) to regulate the destructive behavior of those wielding
economic power – let alone the imagination to conceive of an alternative to
capitalism.

One of the features of capitalism that has enabled it to survive is its ability
both to create and to take advantage of economic crises.

It has inspired people to search for alternatives that provide a more balanced
and stable form of existence, where they can count on regular access to the
fundamentals of their survival – food and shelter, peace and community.

This current phase of capitalism is most frequently referred to as ‘neoliberal’.

Embedded in it is a dangerously limited notion of the human that reduces us to
mere calculators of individual economic costs and benefits.

It is a project that reduces all human activities to ‘homo economicus’ and takes
in almost every sphere of life from criminal justice to immigration.

It is easy to see the appeal of this to CEOs with eight-figure pay cheques and
the rest of the one per cent. If you fail, the responsibility also lies entirely
on your shoulders for having ‘mismanaged’ your own life by making bad choices.
You pathetic creature.

Government may help keep you alive if it doesn't cost too much but don't come
crying for more than the bare minimum. You’re lucky to get that.

Thoughtful people simply have the stubborn belief that we can do better than
this. They have an underlying belief in the fellowship and solidarity of women
and men and their capacity to co-operate with each other for the common good.

They quickly come to realize that the opportunistic freedom of the derivative
trader, real-estate speculator or arms dealer results in bankruptcies, evictions
and corpses.

In its increasingly desperate quest for profit, capital is driving us over the
ecological edge, endangering the very possibility of sustainable human life on
the planet.

In practice, most alternatives to capitalism are seen as some form of socialism,
which now has a checkered history stretching back over two centuries. The early
stirrings of socialist thought eventually crystallized into two main forms:
communism and social democracy, both of which are flawed and seem to have
largely capitulated to the forces they once resisted.

The main alternative in which those opposed to the system invested their hopes
was a socialism brought about in one way or another through the democratic
transformation of the state. In those days no-one doubted that the triumph of
socialism meant more, not less, democracy. Opponents of socialism were staunchly
opposed to such an expansion of democracy, seeing it as a form of threatening
mob rule.

This blind spot about using state power to install socialism from above is
common to the social democratic as well as the communist Left, and it has proved
the undoing of the socialist hopes that were so strong in the 19th century.

Few would today argue that over-reliance on a centralized state played a key
role in the undoing of both the politics and economics of orthodox communism.

The consequence was an alternative to capitalism that was decidedly
unattractive, as it squeezed popular democracy and personal freedom while at the
same time failing to deliver on the promise of economic prosperity.

In retrospect it could easily be claimed that orthodox state communism was not
really an alternative to capitalism at all but merely a transitional form of it
that allowed certain large ‘backward’ societies, hitherto blocked in their
developmental path, to move towards their own peculiar model of autocratic
capitalism.

Today, both Russia and China, once the two centerpieces of world communism, have
evolved into models of authoritarian capitalism in which a political élite,
mostly made up of former communists, rules in alliance with a corporate and
financial oligarchy.

The other strain of state socialism that has competed with orthodox communism is
that of social democracy.

During the early years it rallied around issues such as trade-union rights and
extending the franchise to include women and those without property – as has
already been mentioned, in the 19th century it was almost always assumed by both
proponents and foes that socialism meant greater democracy.
[\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:631)

For the great social democratic parties of Europe World War One proved a
watershed.Here was exactly the kind of conflict (a capitalist war fueled by
nationalist posturing and the fight for markets and imperial influence) that
socialism claimed to oppose. Yet party after party rallied around the flag,
supporting a war that resulted in millions of young working-class soldiers dying
or being maimed in the mud of the trenches. It was a shocking betrayal of the
most fundamental socialist principles.

This was the beginning of the end of the commitment of mainstream social
democracy to spearheading the creation of an alternative to capitalism. Despite
various ebbs and flows, the rest of the 20th century saw the drift of the
Center-Left towards an inexorable accommodation with the capitalist system which
is by now quite clear.

The name of the game shifted from replacing capitalism to managing its business
cycles and predatory nature in as fair a way as possible.

By and large,a tame Center-Left proved sufficiently accommodating to the needs
of capital.

There were no illusions with Blair and company that there was going to be
anything but an embrace of actually existing capitalism with a bit of tinkering
at the edges.

Social justice is off the table and has been replaced by modest taxation and
balanced budgets. [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:701)

Achieving high government office becomes a question of compromise and careers.
It tends to trap the Center-Left into managing the fundamentally undemocratic
structures (including the security apparatus) of government, and this sucks all
the oxygen out of any remaining social vision.

Globalization, of course, greatly enhances the capacity of capital to move its
resources around the world when threatened.

Only a radical government with a significant counterweight rooted in society
would have any hope of facing down such forces.

But instead of building this kind of counterweight, the Center-Left concentrates
on organizing to gain and keep electoral power.

It is the state that, in different ways, has consistently derailed socialist
ambitions. In its Bolshevik form it led to dictatorship and the inevitable
degeneration into ruthlessness and corruption.

The Center-Left has become hopelessly enmeshed: losing any sense of how to turn
the oil tanker around, it has eventually decided that it is not possible or even
desirable to do so.

The institutional power of the state itself needs to be recast and re-rooted
back into the society it so badly represents.

Without voices to raise doubts about the corruptions of conventional politics
and state power, social democracy was gradually transformed from an alternative
to capitalism to a more humane version of its management.

Another nail in the coffin of state socialism and the Bolshevik tradition
occurred after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the overthrow of
unchallenged Communist Party rule in its former satellites between 1989 and
1991.

A couple of decades later, now that the insecurities of life in the market
system have struck home, the tenor of politics is much darker than the sunny
optimism of the immediate post-Soviet era.

The growing acceptance and assertion of women’s rights has eliminated or at
least significantly challenged a large amount of arbitrary power over the lives
of both women and men. But it has gone beyond the informal and personal to raise
questions as to the legitimacy of how political power is exercised through the
state.

Social movements exist within a broader milieu of ‘civil society’, which
includes a number of non-state actors, such as non-governmental organizations,
that advocate for the broader public interest and often act as watchdogs on
state power. [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:957)

Not so long ago, the environment was taken no more seriously by the Left than by
the Right. But the mounting evidence of ecological crisis has forged a new
dividing line in politics – between those who insist on business as usual,
whatever the costs, and those who understand that all of us, all over the world,
have to find new ways of living within our ecological means.

These questions loom increasingly large, casting a shadow over not only
capitalism but any orthodox alternative to it.

Today, only Cuba, with its emphasis on alternative energy and organic
agriculture, stands as a partial alternative to sacrificing the environment on
the altar of economic development.

Elsewhere, as with the late Hugo Chávez crafting a form of petro-socialism in
Venezuela, short-term advantage seems to be trumping long-term ecological
sanity.

The need for an alternative is urgent, as capitalism is irredeemably committed
to a form of growth that endangers the existence of human life on Earth.

It is by now pretty obvious that both inequality and growth are built into the
very DNA of the capitalist system.

The most visible political manifestation of the rise in ecological consciousness
has been the birth of Green parties that now populate parliaments and assemblies
around the world.

The first-past-the-post system popular in the Anglo-Saxon world has been
successful in marginalizing Green political representation.
[\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1037)

They are often plagued by having to make the same kind of compromises that have
seen the Center-Left adapt itself so readily to the needs of managing a
capitalist economy.

The corruption of personal ambition and the enticements of power should never be
underrated in political cultures that trade on such things.

A more basic challenge to the overall direction of capitalism and the social and
ecological wreckage it is piling up is essential.

Inequality is the other major consequence of skewed capitalist growth.

For those of an eco-socialist persuasion, it is essential that the costs of
slowing growth are borne in an equitable manner.

But have no doubt – degrowth there will be! It is just a question of whether
this will result in equitable and democratic social arrangements or in
gate-guarded communities serviced by underpaid workers and surrounded by large
populations of environmental refugees.

Mainstream economists now believe that the age of growth that started in the
18th century is drawing to a close.

In such areas as global warming, species extinction and oceanic health, we
appear to be reaching global tipping points. [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1101)

Any alternative to capitalism needs a post-growth future.

**It has by now reached the point that any alternative to capitalism which does
not accord the ecological survival of humanity a central place in its program
simply cannot be taken seriously.**

Utopian thinking is liable to provoke scorn from all sides – and totalitarian
blueprints have given it a bad name. Yet conservatives are as prone to dream of
perfect free markets as radicals are of equality or living in harmony with the
Earth.

The history of different imagined and desirable futures is longer than that of
the current epoch of capitalism through which we are suffering.

But, by the time of the Russian Revolution, it was widely believed by socialists
of nearly all stripes that a more practical socialism had gained ascendancy and
that the utopian variant had all but vanished from the field. Ideals gave way to
the exercise of power.

Conventional state socialism has proved a disappointment even for many of its
adherents, who were often among the first to proclaim its outright failures.

Keeping utopian thinking out of politics has united both the conventional Left
and the conservative Right.

In a conservative sleight of hand, however, many reactionaries still hold a soft
spot in their hearts for the ‘perfect competition’ utopian writings of the
rightwing libertarian Ayn Rand.

And, while the quality of utopian thinking varies widely, in most of it there is
simply a refreshing desire for a more equal and inspiring way of life.

If those proposing an alternative to our current capitalist civilization can
only say what they don't want, and cannot give us a sense of what they actually
propose, success will likely remain elusive.

This seems to be a fertile time to rethink our social and economic
relationships.

There is at least one school of thought which holds that the mainstream of
Western thinking itself – from the monotheistic religions coming out of the
Middle East, through European enlightenment notions of progress, down to
present-day capitalist rationality and market fetishism – is forever pointing
towards a future that never seems to arrive. This is the utopianism of the
powerful.

According to this utopianism of the powerful, the dystopian difficulties of the
present are simply evidence of the sacrifices we make on the altar of some
eventual salvation.

Yet somehow it is always those who don't have to make sacrifices who demand them
of others.

Meanwhile, inequality grows and hundreds of millions across the world barely
survive on a couple of dollars a day.

The post-Seattle slogan ‘Another world is possible’ is in itself evidence to the
contrary. It is pretty clear that those who want to build an alternative to
capitalism cannot help but think about what that alternative is going to look
like.

How can we distribute the world’s wealth in such a way as to guarantee a decent
level of equality? How can democracy be something more than popularity contests
amongst the political classes?

How can we live lightly on the earth in order to sustain ourselves and the
natural world on which we and other species depend?

It is also worth remembering that at one time such causes as ending slavery,
child labor or the eight-hour day were thought of as utopian dreams that would
never be achieved.

But things are changing. These days inequality in Latin America has dropped to
its lowest level for 30 years – and this at a time when the rest of the world is
seeing the gap between rich and poor grow dramatically. The business weekly The
Economist will tell you that this has nothing to do with socialist governments –
but they would say that, wouldn't they?

The basic tension within this kind of leftist movement is between those who
think that their goals are best achieved through a more efficient and practical
top-down politics, and those who insist on a new kind of democratic ecosocialist
politics from below.

The differences express themselves over both limits and methods: popular
assemblies or bureaucratic dictate; behind-the-scenes maneuvers or the politics
of the street.

The large demonstrations spearheaded by activists for free public transportation
that shook urban Brazil in June 2013 were further proof that the political
class, whatever its Left credentials, is on notice to deliver the goods.

Behind the commons is the fundamental idea that life, information, human
relationships, popular culture, and the earth’s riches are sacrosanct and not
for sale.

Since the birth of capitalism there has been a constant pressure to transfer the
ownership and control of common resources into private hands.

This process almost always sacrifices sustainability and ecological health for
speed and expediency at the lowest possible cost.

Water politics is a growing source of tension between the survival economy and
industrial demand.

The water crisis is largely of our own making. It has resulted not from the
natural limitations of the water supply or lack of financing and appropriate
technologies, but rather from profound failures in water government.

Another area of urgent concern for commons activists is the recent growth in
large private landholdings in poor countries in the Global South.

Some are initiated by ‘food insecure’ nations such as China, Japan, South Korea
and the oil-rich Gulf States. But most such major land grabs are still carried
out by private corporations so as to take land out of food production and
instead grow export crops .

Here the motivation is usually gaining a lucrative return and the players behind
the scenes are a variety of investment, pension and hedge funds.

With neoliberal privatization, the idea that utilities are public goods that
should be provided at minimal cost to all has pretty much fallen out of favor.
Instead, corporations have developed private industries that are more committed
to their shareholders and executives than to service recipients.

The commons is not just a battlefield between corporate predators and those who
resist them – it is also a source of hope for those willing to imagine a world
beyond capitalism. It represents a space between the private market and the
political state in which humanity can control and democratically root our common
wealth.

An alternative to capitalism must in the end be [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1615)
based on a more complex sense of the human than orthodox economists’ notion that
we are all hardwired to a rational calculus of individual costs and benefits.

If this does not succeed, then we risk everything, not least our genetic make-up
and that of the plants and animals with which we share the earth, being turned
into corporate private property.

**The stakes are high. The commons are connected to our sense of place, to our
identities, livelihoods and self-expression – ultimately even to our survival as
a species. [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1083)**

Politics has been professionalized and depoliticized. One party seems pretty
much like another – with the result that voters’ distrust of politicians has
soared and participation in elections has tumbled to new lows. Occasional
eruptions of protest are not enough: something needs to change.

The burst of capitalist triumphalism that met the implosion of orthodox
communism at the end of the 1980s did not last long.

The deregulatory climate that was supposed to free up capital to deliver jobs
and prosperity turned out to be a speculative shell game.

But despite the crisis and mass moral revulsion that followed the crash,
coherent opposition in the heartland of European and North American capitalism
has so far failed to emerge. [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1743)

It leaves the field of ‘responsible’ opposition to a Center-Left that has
already capitulated far too much to entertain creative alternative ways of
reorganizing society.

The point is that conventional politics is being monopolized by a corps of
professional politicians who are both too compromised and lack the radical
imagination to go against the momentum of the market.

In the end, the generation of 1960s radicals even failed to defend their limited
progress towards creating a more socially responsible capitalism.
[\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1778)

While most Sixties activists held that the problem with democracy was that there
wasn't enough of it, these counter-insurgency intellectuals held that there was
just too much.

With a few exceptions, they also had a compliant corporate media that acted as
an effective loudspeaker for the business oligarchy.

By the 1980s, a sweeping offensive in favor of deregulation and privatization
was well under way, led by Margaret Thatcher in the UK and Ronald Reagan in the
US. This program was called ‘neoliberalism’.

When the communist world imploded that was just the icing on the cake for
capitalist triumphalism.

A kind of galloping inequality took hold and has never looked back since.

Democracy in its original Greek sense meant self-rule by a designated population
of citizens. Today, most accepted definitions give all citizens over a certain
age the right to vote. But what they are voting for is becoming pretty murky.
Self-rule is certainly not on the agenda.

Since the neoliberal counter-revolution of the 1980s there has been a hollowing
out of democracy to the point that large portions of the electorate no longer
bother to cast their ballots.

The decisive factors in winning an election are access to the funds (provided in
many cases by corporate capital) needed to buy media time, and expertise at
manipulating the electorate.

Clinton and Blair represented the capitulation to a neoliberal consensus that
has taken hold of the major parties in most multi-party systems.

What has emerged is a kind of managerial state with only minor shades of
difference between the political parties aiming to run it.

The public is encouraged to think only as taxpayers concerned with getting
‘value for money’. The more generous bonds of citizenship, empathy and
solidarity are dissolved in the acid of possessive individualism.

All of this comes at a time of serious economic crisis that has cost many people
their dwellings and livelihoods, and polls show a discontent bordering on fury
with the incumbents who are attempting to impose a draconian austerity regime
almost everywhere.

The depoliticized culture has been tightly engineered by the political class.

Political issues today focus around how best to cater to the rich and the
corporations in the hope that they might ‘invest’ some of their ill-gotten
fortunes to provide us with elusive employment.

There lurks behind the scenes a half-formed awareness that something is
dreadfully wrong – although what it is and what to do about it remain elusive.
[\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1861)

As noted earlier, our species faces an ecological crisis, the consequences of
which are proving increasingly dire. In addition, the social terrain on which
industrial society was constructed – stable well-paid employment won through
hard trade union struggles; a safety net that caught the most vulnerable and
gave people a realistic hope that their children would be better off than
themselves – is now a thing of the past.

The consequences of this are dire for working people the world over – and
increasingly also for those who think of themselves as middle class. Large
numbers are falling through the cracks and finding that the social safety net
has been yanked away by the neoliberal Right, often with the compliance of their
center-left ‘opponents’.

The comfort zone of our political class will need to be breached if anything
significant is to change. The political failures on everything from climate
degradation through excessive military spending to control of the speculative
banking industry speak volumes. Radical problems call for radical solutions.

There has over the past four or five decades been a dramatic shift in
perspective on the part of the Left that still harbors serious intentions of
replacing capitalism with a more humane social system.

By the 1960s the Marxist-Leninist paradigm had begun to lose its luster for many
radicals and by the 1990s, with the collapse of the Soviet Union and China’s
embrace of capitalism, the game was pretty much up.
[\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:1914)

These days there is also a tone of desperation creeping in, born of the
combination of ecological meltdown with austerity regimes imposed to pay for the
speculative extravagances of the wealthy. As the new slogan goes, ‘There is no
planet B’.

What is the purpose of a democracy of limited or symbolic representation that is
so far from the actual exercise of popular self-rule? Why participate in an
economics of centralized growth that spreads inequality while destroying the
biosphere? What would be the purpose of any self-management if workers continued
to produce the same weapons and waste? [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:2008)

The Left needs a political presence that establishes both the necessity and
viability of a better future – and some sense of how we might get there. Only if
this starts happening will we be able to stop preaching to the choir and reach
out to those who live in the suburbs, populate the shopping malls,hold down two
or three low-paid jobs to feed their kids, and see no way out of the spiritual
desert that capitalism is quickly becoming.

There is every reason to rethink the coercive state as it is currently
constructed. It is a block to any notion of democracy in its most profound
communal and socialist sense: the self-rule of the polity.

For in many ways the state, which is supposed to represent and care for society,
actually occupies it as a coercive and alien power.

We need to move beyond anti-politics and have the courage to envision and
advocate for an alternative. One such path involves embracing degrowth not just
as an ecological necessity but as a path to greater quality (and equality) of
life, putting financial capital at the service of people, and providing a
universal basic income. We must dare to dream.

Ultimately, however, there is no real choice but to put forward a set of ideas
that could lead to a more appealing future for humankind within a sustainable
ecological framework that gives us a chance of collective survival.Otherwise our
protests become [\*](#ASIN:B00JNYEIAM;LOC:2258) gratuitous or simply nihilistic.

There is great potential for change in the cracks and if the present momentum of
the system is left unchecked, we will be heading over an economic and ecological
cliff. We have decades, not centuries, to turn this around.But there is still
just a chance (even if the odds are long) of saving our sad and beautiful world.

[amzn:B00JNYEIAM]

