State of Power 2016: Democracy, Power & Resistance
==================================================

By **various authors**

‘Real democracy now!’, the demand of the Spanish indignados as they occupied the
squares of cities across Spain, is the slogan which can best guide us in
challenging and escaping the prison of today’s power structures.

‘Real democracy now!’ expresses the determined desire of a generation of young
Europeans facing a world in which they were brought up to take for granted what
they thought was democracy: they found themselves in a political system in which
they were in effect without a voice and in which only the rich have a say, and
the interests of the banks and shareholders seeking quick returns predominate
over the interests of the majority of people.

They have been, above all, the outcome of the conscious mobilisation of elite
financial and political power to block punishment of corporate crime and
regulations of the financial industry demanded by citizens.

In this sense, the power of financial capital in the USA and in Europe is
fundamentally the same, except that in he institutions of the European Union, in
effect ‘post-democratic’ in their original design, the banksters can operate
more effectively behind the scene, influencing governments that have strategic
continental power, but without facing any democratic counter-power or force of
accountability.

The institutions of representative democracy are impotent, or have been rendered
impotent, in the face of /by the workings of globalised, financialised
twenty-first century capitalism. ‘This model [based on parliamentary
sovereignty] is finished’.

So long as the goal of democracy is applied only to political power, understood
as separate from economic power, then universal franchise provides only an
abstract, formal political equality in a society that is fundamentally unequal.

And the more unequal society becomes, the more empty formal political equality
appears and the greater the level of disgust with parliamentary politics.

It is a political process which consequently tends to disguise rather than
expose inequalities, or worse still, to re-interpret inequality as the fault of
those with less power – and to punish them for it; and generally protects rather
than challenges private economic power.

Simultaneously, with this obfuscation of the real relations of economic power,
the separated processes of political representation also disguise the
dependency, especially but not only economic, of the powerful on those whom they
exploit or oppress.

When inherited but flawed mechanisms/institutions for calling the powerful to
account have been rendered all but useless, what other or new sources of power
do people have as a result of their being indispensable to the powerful? To
answer this question, we need to investigate exactly how power works.

Historically, social-democratic and communist parties have been built around a
benevolent version of the understanding of power-as-domination. Their strategies
have been based on winning the power to govern and then using the ‘levers’ of
the state apparatus paternalistically to meet what they identify as the needs of
the people.

The assumption is the inadequate capacity of the people to govern themselves.

The emergence of power-as-transformative-capacity had its contemporary origins
in the rebellions of the late 1960s and early 1970s. A central and common theme
of these rebellions was a challenge to all conventions and institutions based on
deference to authority.

In their refusal to defer to authority, they broke the unspoken bond between
knowledge and authority – the idea that those in power knew best, including what
was best for you.

These radically democratic approaches to knowledge laid the organisational and
cultural foundations that have underpinned social movements ever since, from the
alter-globalisation movement of the late 1990s through to Occupy and the
indignados. The emphasis on sharing knowledge and decentralisation also helped
to create the conditions for the web – born as it was of the Californian
counter-culture of the late 1960s.

A question that will permeate debates and practical experiments in developing
counter power throughout 2016 and beyond, is how far, and under what conditions,
power-as-domination (essentially having control over state institutions,
national and municipal) can be a resource or a source of facilitation for
power-as-transformative-capacity.

Historically, the dominant view on the relationship between social movements and
political parties was that leftist parties should be the voice of movements
whose objectives they shared.

Politics, or rather political parties, seem to have an inherent tendency to
close in on themselves - maybe in search of traditional forms of certainty, and
linked to this predictability and with it a controlling, monopolistic conception
of agency.

(Hilary Wainwright)

\*\*\*

The threat to democracy has always been the disdain the establishment has for
it. Democracy by its nature is very fragile and the antipathy towards it by the
establishment is always extremely pronounced and the establishment has always
sought to undo it.

Whenever the ballot box produces a result the establishment doesn’t like, the
democratic process is either overturned or threatened with being overturned.
[\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:277)

The European Union institutions in Brussels, the European Central Bank and
others, were established as democracy-free zones by design.

It was never meant to be the beginning of a republic or a democracy where ‘we,
the people of Europe’ rule the roost.

I was astonished to hear the German finance minister say to me, verbatim, that
elections cannot be allowed to change established economic policy. In other
words, that democracy is fine as long as it does not threaten to change
anything!

The main thing that one should note about the EU is that the whole operation in
Brussels is based on a process of depoliticising politics, of taking what are
essentially profoundly, irrevocably political decisions and pushing them into
the realm of a rules-bound technocracy, an algorithmic approach.

The European Parliament is a cruel joke, it doesn’t function as a proper
Parliament. It is, at best, a simulation of parliament, not a real parliament.

Now, the British Conservatives that are supporting exit from the EU argue that
they don’t need the European Union; that they can have the Single Market without
the straitjacket of Brussels.

So if you reject the possibility of a democratised European Union, you reject
the possibility of a sovereign British parliament and you end up with atrocious
trade deals, like TTIP.

We have managed to create a monster in Europe, where the Eurozone is supremely
powerful as an entity but where no one is in control. The institutions and rules
that have been put in place in order to maintain the political equilibrium that
set up the whole euro currency project disempowers almost every player that has
anything to do with democratic legitimacy.

The New Deal put in place institutions that act as shock absorbers, whereas in
Europe we are back to where we were in 1929. We are allowing this competitive
austerity together with bailout loans to destroy one country after another until
the European Union turns against itself.

But I think with issues of society and politics, we have a moral and political
duty to be optimistic and to say okay, of all the options available to us, which
is the one least likely to cause catastrophe? For me, that is an attempt to
democratise the European Union. Do I believe we will succeed? I don’t know, but
unless I have hope that we can I can’t get out of bed in the morning and go
around do stuff.

The sovereignty of parliaments has been dissolved by the Eurozone and the
Eurogroup; the capacity to fulfil one’s mandate at the level of the nation-state
has been eradicated and therefore any manifestos addressed to citizens of a
particular member state become theoretical exercises. Electoral mandates are by
design now impossible to fulfil.

We should build a cross-border pan-European movement, hold a conversation in
that space to identify common policies to tackle common problems, and once we
have a consensus on common Europe-wide strategies, this consensus can find
expression of that at the nation-state and regional and municipal levels.

If we fail by 2025 then I don’t think there will be a European Union to save or
even talk about. To those who want to know what we want now the answer is:
Transparency!

In the medium to long term, we shall be calling for a Constitutional Assembly to
be convened by the peoples of Europe, empowered to decide on a future democratic
constitution that will replace all existing European treaties.

I put my emphasis on building a pan-European movement. It is because the only
way of changing Europe is to do this by a groundswell that rises throughout
Europe. Otherwise the protest vote manifesting itself in Greece, Spain, the UK,
Portugal, if it is not synchronised everywhere, will eventually dissipate,
leaving behind it nothing but the bitterness and insecurity produced by Europe’s
unstoppable fragmentation.

(Yanis Varoulakis)

\*\*\*

There are, broadly, two main and sharply divided positions on the left in
Europe. The first is that, however deplorable the brutalising of Greek democracy
by the Troika, this is merely a reflection of the weakness of the left in each
of the EU ’s 28 member states. As a result, the centre-right controls three main
institutions of the EU. If the left were at the helm in more countries and thus
in the EU institutions, things would be different.

Look at all the tremendous environmental, health and safety, and human rights
protections that the EU has passed, they argue.

Such progressives tend to see themselves as internationalists and cosmopolitans
and add as a warning that a retreat from the EU would only open the door further
to nationalism and the far right.

Advocates of the ‘reform’ position add that once outside the EU, markets would
hardly be any less vicious towards and disruptive of a country’s democracy than
the Troika. They are not wrong on this last point.
[\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:553)

The second position holds that the Greek debacle is merely the latest episode in
a long line of breaches of democratic norms and that the EU is structurally
undemocratic and unreformable.

As a result, rupture with the EU and retreat to the nation-state is the order of
the day.

For them, there is no European demos. They cannot imagine one. They do not want
one. Advocates of the ‘rupture’ position also point out that the existence of
the EU has hardly prevented the growth of nationalism and the far right. They
too are not wrong on this last point.

Both positions, however, ignore the key issue at stake: in the era of
globalisation, the steady removal of decision-making from democratic chambers by
EU elites is serving as a blueprint for post-democratic governance around the
world, at the global, continental, national, and even local level. The rallying
cry should go beyond reform (however welcome this might be) or rupture (however
necessary this might be), and take up once again the demand of Spanish
anti-austerity protesters in 2011, of Real Democracy Now—at all levels
throughout society, both within and beyond the nation-state.

The European Commission is unelected. The members of the Council of Ministers
and its top-level incarnation, the European Council, are only indirectly elected
and craft laws in secrecy with neither press nor public allowed to witness their
proceedings.

The president of the European Council—regularly styled European President—is
likewise unelected.

The sole directly elected institution of the EU legislative sausage factory, the
European Parliament, has no right of legislative initiative—that is to say, it
cannot propose and pass laws; it can only amend what the Commission and Council
send to it for approval.

Being restricted in this way makes it like no other parliament in the democratic
world.

If voters disagree with the policies of this European 'government', there is no
way to vote them out.

This is because these contracts between states trump democracy. “Every new
government needs to fulfil the contractual agreements of its predecessors”.
“There can be no democratic choice against the European treaties”.

Defenders of EU’s current structures regularly point to the Council of
Ministers/European Council as supposed evidence of its democratic mandate,
because ministers and prime ministers or presidents are at least elected in
their own countries.

The Council operates as a senate-like legislative chamber, yet there are no
elections to this body. It is as if you were permitted to vote for your local
MP, but there were never any general elections.

Why is this such a big problem?

First, voters need a regular chance to ‘overthrow’ their rulers, not merely
their local representative. Second, the parties seeking office need to have a
material interest in appealing to every part of the country—or in this case,
every part of the Union.

These two phenomena are sides of a single coin: accountability, which is the
bedrock of representative government.

As governance structures become steadily cut off from democratic restraint, they
become much more open to elite capture. Without popular checks on power,
citizens begin to feel that there is no way to change who governs them.

Post-democratic international governance structures—electionless
intergovernmentalism—are popping up like weeds today in almost every possible
policy area, from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the UN Security Council
and G7, to the WTO and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership
(TTIP), to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, and even
the International Whaling Commission. We are living in the era of construction
of an architecture of global governance—which is certainly necessary given the
global problems we face—but in the absence of, or more often antipathy towards,
global democracy. [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:658)

The EU, not just the Eurozone, is an affront to parliamentary democratic norms
that the left has fought to establish, defend and advance for more than two
centuries. Its structures are not reformable; indeed the very structures work to
inoculate themselves against progressive reform. If reform is impossible, then
overthrow is required.

In a globalised economy, the type of social democracy that characterised the
1940–1970 period is no longer possible, even in large economies. Capital flight
and economic sabotage will quickly tame a left-wing government.

The Greek debacle provides evidence that, in a globalised economy, even
left-of-social-democracy governments such as Syriza must capitulate. This would
be true for a Podemos government in Spain or a Jeremy Corbyn-led government in
the UK.

Catastrophe is assured whether in or outside the euro, whether in or outside the
EU.

How, then, are these two facts reconcilable: that nation-based politics is
impotent and yet that there must be rupture with the unreformable EU? It can
only follow that there is no use for nation-based politics any more, even of the
form of a Syriza or its equivalents elsewhere in Europe, and that over the
medium term European parties to the left of social democracy both in and outside
the EU must fuse into a single, extra-national party with a common programme: a
democratic and social United States of Europe, built afresh from the ground up.

There is no parliamentary forum through which this could be implemented. The
European Parliament, as argued above, has no powers of legislative initiative.
The lack of general elections to the Council likewise precludes this body as a
venue for reform.

And we must extend this argument with respect to the emerging network of
intergovernmental global governance structures.

The primary argument of campaigners against TTIP and CETA is that the agreements
are a threat to democracy.

If the overturning of democratically approved legislation is to be opposed, then
what is essentially the same thing, the undemocratic imposition of legislation,
must also be opposed. If something is undemocratic, then it is undemocratic
whether we like its results or not.

How, then, are we to decide what to do, what policies to adopt, across borders
but in a democratic fashion?

This binary is the global equivalent of the divergence between those who call
for reform of the EU and rupture with the EU. [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:721)

Elites recognise that there are many areas beyond the nation-state that need to
be governed, but they are loath to subject such decision-making to the
democratic process for fear that the people might vote the wrong way. It is one
thing for the right to lose a national election; it’s another thing entirely for
the right to lose the whole world.

So progressives must begin to match the scale of their ambition, by putting
forward ideas for a democratic world government to replace post-democratic world
governance. [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:727)

Now is the time to begin discussing what global democracy would look like
concretely and to start to build it.

(Leigh Phillips)

\*\*\*

Who is an expert about the economy? This question might seem distinct or distant
from matters of political power and debates about the best way to encourage
participatory, democratic decision-making.

Many economic matters are removed from meaningful, wide-ranging democratic
debate and become the special domain of a few, consensual experts.

Economic policies presented as “technical” solutions are often, in fact, about
bringing about politically charged social transformations. These transformations
are typically in the interests of a few, powerful actors, popularly referred to
as “the 1%”, but legitimated by arguments presenting them as necessary,
reasonable and in the interests of all.

There is a gulf between the language of many economic analyses and everyday
understanding.

Critics contend that economic decision-making is not about the application of
specialised scientific expertise. In fact, it reflects the sedimented power of
the former colonial nations, the USA and, as we have already suggested, the
patriarchal authority of men, typically from shared upper-class backgrounds.

In short, economics tends to “forget” its socially embedded character,
pretending to a God’s eye view developed from nowhere. In fact, economics
expertise at the IMF, World Bank and similar institutions is sharply and
narrowly socially defined.

Any historical age has the economists it “deserves”. Keynesianism prevailed in a
post-war context of relatively strengthened working class power and neoliberal
economics prevail when the 1% is particularly powerful.

The affirmation, “Nothing aboutA more just and ecologically sustainable world
will never be created by experts, but only by ordinary people given a chance to
meaningfully shape their own lives in solidarity with others.

 us, without us!” lies at the heart of participatory democratic principles.

Those who hold to this principle reject the idea that experts – or any others –
may speak in their place.

Unlike researchers, ordinary people generally have few opportunities to
critically engage with their own practical experiences and exchange with others
about them.

A more just and ecologically sustainable world will never be created by experts,
but only by ordinary people given a chance to meaningfully shape their own lives
in solidarity with others.

(Elaine Coburn)

\*\*\*

Nearly eight years after the outbreak of the global financial crisis, it is
evident that those who were responsible for bringing it about have managed to go
completely scot-free. Not only that, they have been able to get governments to
stick the costs of the crisis and the burden of the recovery on their victims.

Finance capital has been the single biggest factor discrediting liberal
democracy in the last few years. In the face-off between democracy and finance,
there have been few instances in which the latter has prevailed, indeed, only
one: Iceland.

Decisive in securing this outcome was what Cornelia Woll termed finance
capital’s “structural power”. One dimension of this power was the $344 million
the industry spent lobbying the US Congress in the first nine months of 2009,
when legislators were taking up financial reform.

While traditional fraudsters such as Bernie Madoff were prosecuted and jailed,
the chiefs and lieutenants of the biggest financial institutions, who had caused
infinitely greater damage, were untouched.

Wall Street was able to change the narrative about the causes of the financial
crisis, throwing the blame entirely on the state.

Brandishing the image of the The triumph of Wall Street in reversing the popular
surge against it following the outbreak of the financial crisis was evident in
the run-up to the 2016 presidential elections.

USA becoming like Greece if the government increased its debt load by going into
deficit spending, the Republicans succeeded in bringing about a US version of
the [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:1172) austerity programmes that were imposed as
the solution in Southern Europe.

Thus the cost of the folThe political institutions of one of the world’s most
advanced liberal democracies were no match for the structural power and
ideological resources of the financial establishment.

lies of Wall Street fell not on banks but on ordinary Americans, with the
unemployed reaching nearly 10% of the workforce in 2011 and youth unemployment
reaching over 20%.

egulating Wall Street was not an issue in the Republican primary debates while
in the Democratic debates, it was a side issue, despite the efforts of candidate
Bernie Sanders to make it the centre-piece.

The triumph of Wall Street in reversing the popular surge against it following
the outbreak of the financial crisis was evident in the run-up to the 2016
presidential elections.

Regulating Wall Street was not an issue in the Republican primary debates while
in the Democratic debates, it was a side issue, despite the efforts of candidate
Bernie Sanders to make it the centre-piece.

The political institutions of one of the world’s most advanced liberal
democracies were no match for the structural power and ideological resources of
the financial establishment.

In Europe, finance capital showed its most ugly face, where it harnessed the
power of the state – indeed, the collective power of 18 Eurozone states led by
Germany – to crush peoples’ efforts to control their economic destiny.
[\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:1207)

The subjugation of the Greeks is the latest victory notched up by finance
capital since it began its scorched-earth counter-offensive against forces
seeking to constrain and regulate it for bringing about the financial crisis
that broke in 2008. Yet, its victory is likely to be Pyrrhic, an extremely
costly affair that is likely to lead to a greater disaster.

In October 2015, Iceland’s judicial system sent the heads of the country’s
biggest banks to jail, along with 23 of their lieutenants.

The economy of Iceland did not collapse when its biggest banks were allowed to
fail.

What happened in Iceland commanded attention because it was a contrast to what
happened elsewhere.

Iceland pointed to the possibilities of democratic control of the banks. But it
was the exception to the rule. Elsewhere finance capital got off scot-free. This
is not only unjust and tragic. It is dangerous.

The combination of deep austerity-induced recession or stagnation that grips
much of Europe and the USA and the absence of financial reform is deadly.

With the interests of finance capital now the driving force of the big Western
democracies, and virtually unchecked, the question then is not if another bubble
will burst but when.

The failure of the current institutional arrangements of liberal democracy to
promote the counter-movement in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis probably means
that the next crisis might trigger no less than a fundamental institutional
reconfiguration of society ’s relation to finance capital, indeed, to Capital
itself.

Walden Bello

\*\*\*

The World Economic Forum ’s Global Redesign Initiative is perhaps the best
reflection of how corporations and other elites envision the future of
governance. It calls for marginalising intergovernmental decision-making with a
system of multi-stakeholder governance, but what does this mean for democracy,
accountability and the rule of law?

Prompted by the uncertainties about the stability of globalisation, in 2009 the
World Economic Forum (WEF) convened an international expert group to formulate a
new system of global governance.

What is ingenious and disturbing is that the WEF multi-stakeholder governance
proposal does [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:1332) not require approval or
disapproval by any intergovernmental body. Absent any intergovernmental action
the informal transition to MSG as a partial replacement of multilateralism can
just happen.

The proliferation of multi-stakeholder governance arrangements has, however,
gained credibility without a careful analysis of the democratic and political
consequences of these institutions. For the wider public and particularly for
grassroots communities affected directly by the issue it seeks to address, it is
not then surprising that an announcement that a new MSG is taking a lead on
global issues is greeted with a good deal of scepticism and anxiety.

The World Economic Forum proposals for multi-stakeholder governance are a timely
reminder that we need to take a new look at the current rules of engagement in
international affairs. It is then timely for a broader range of other social
groups, particularly those most adversely affected by globalisation, to re-think
how they believe global governance should work.

Harris Gleckman

\*\*\*

Why are activists struggling for a more democratic system unable to attract more
people to their side?

Why, despite the intensifying ecological crisis caused by capitalism, is the
movement for radical system change still confined to the margins?

This essay seeks to contribute to understanding the causes of the movement’s
weakness by drawing attention to another, typically overlooked, way by which the
dominant seek to contain challenges to their undemocratic rule.

I argue that part of the reason why activists struggling for a democratic
alternative to capitalism find it difficult to draw more people to their cause
is because a section of the world’s dominant classes have been waging what we
can think of, as a kind of global “passive revolution”: an attempt to
re-construct or secure (global) hegemony by attempting to fundamentally reform
global capitalism in order to partially grant the demands of subordinate groups.

To better understand how world elites seek to contain counter-hegemonic
challenges to their rule, it is useful to go back to the late 1960s when new
radical movements, including those mobilising around ecological issues, burst
onto the world stage as part of a broader resurgence of radicalism.

To constantly intensify their exploitation of both workers and nature so as to
maximise profits they argued that they needed to challenge nothing less than
capitalism, patriarchy, racism, and other forms of domination.

Only then, they argued, would it be possible to prioritise people’s welfare and
the planet’s well-being over the need to constantly maximise profits.

These radical intellectuals began to reshape people’s subjectivities by
providing alternative ways of looking at the world, of understanding their
identities, of diagnosing and overcoming their suffering.

Many started to think of themselves as members of oppressed and exploited
classes and also began to connect ‘environmental problems’ and their social
impacts to capitalist, patriarchal, colonial, racial or other forms of
domination.

Many began to aspire to a post-capitalist, if not socialist, society. And they
recognised the need to confront and overthrow the ruling classes and other
dominant groups determined to perpetuate capitalism.

With these changed subjectivities, people connected the struggle around
‘environmental’ problems to broader struggles for social justice and equality.

Critical of “existing society” and pressed into action, a growing number of
people began fighting for what later activists called ‘system change’.

Not since the Great Depression and the New Deal, notes political scientist David
Vogel, did US capitalists feel so “politically vulnerable”.

Breaking with other elites, they effectivelyhey deployed their vast economic
resources and social connections—straddling the worlds of business, politics and
science—to build this movement’s capacity to engage in ideological and concluded
that in order to defuse such a threat, at least some of the grievances and
demands of subordinate groups needed to be addressed—something that could be
done only by fundamentally reforming global capitalism. Under siege, many
dominant intellectuals and corporate elites struggled to understand what was
going on, how to define their interests in the face of it, and how to react.

Many thought that the so-called ‘environmental problems’were not problems: they
could be solved through the normal workings of the market. Many sought to
protect them by simply rejecting the grievances aired by subordinate groups,
killing their proposals, and resorting to coercive measures to intimidate or
discredit their proponents. But there were other intellectuals who pursued and
advocated an altogether different response.

Unlike other elites, they were generally more open to the view that global
warming and other ecological changes were indeed happening. And, unlike other
elites, they thought that the problem involved far larger threats. They also
worried that environmental degradation would further fuel public dissatisfaction
and anger and therefore encourage support for radicalism.

Breaking with other elites, they effectively concluded that in order to defuse
such a threat, at least some of the grievances and demands of subordinate groups
needed to be addressed—something that could be done only by fundamentally
reforming global capitalism.

They deployed their vast economic resources and social connections—straddling
the worlds of business, politics and science—to build this movement’s capacity
to engage in ideological and political struggle on the world stage.

So, like radicals, they explained to people that they could only alleviate their
suffering by pushing for what radicals called ‘system change’. But against
radicals, they told people that changing the system did not entail overthrowing
capitalism, but rather enhancing the global regulation of capitalism through
what the Club of Rome called “radical reform of institutions and political
processes at all levels”.

They told people that they should aspire not to the creation of a
post-capitalist society but to a greener, more regulated, capitalist society.

They called upon the public to join the moral, responsible elites as ‘partners’
in pushing for and bringing about ‘system change.’

They mobilised to equip their supporters with cutting-edge knowledge on global
environmental problems—and with ‘policy options’ for managing them—by funding or
otherwise supporting hundreds if not thousands of universities and government or
inter-governmental research departments and think-tanks.

Ford, Rockefeller, Anderson and others, for example, bankrolled the formation of
the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), Natural Resources Defense Council (NDRC),
and possibly thousands of other moderate or non-radical groups across the world.

Simply put, if it had not been for the independent but converging initiatives of
these reformists—and the elites that supported them—the UN negotiations on
climate change might never have happened.

Thanks to all these investments in political and ideological mobilisation, the
reformist movement was able to go on the offensive from the 1970s onwards.

In so doing, reformist elites did more than just provide limited relief and
material concessions to members of the dominated classes; they also countered
radicals’ attempts to reshape their subjectivities and succeeded in dispelling
their attempts to channel people’s anger and anxiety towards fighting for
radical system change.

For this and other reasons, radicals worldwide have not only found it harder to
gain new adherents from the 1970s on, but even once committed fighters would
either lay down their arms or ‘defect’ altogether.

Thus, without always deploying the violence they constantly keep in the
background, the more forward-looking of the world’s elites have at the very
least been able to d issuade people from struggling to replace capitalism with a
different, radically democratic system; they have not only prevented or
restrained more people from expressing or venting their anger, but have been
able to harness that anger towards tinkering with the system in order to keep it
the same.succeeded in completely defeating or eliminating this challenge
altogether.

And yet, it is also important to stress that they still have not yet succeeded
in completely defeating or eliminating this challenge altogether. For our
movement has not only survived the reformist offensive but in recent years, we
have even become resurgent again.

This does not necessarily mean always opposing the reforms and concessions that
the more ‘radical’ among the reformists are promoting, or refusing to work with
them. But it does mean constantly subverting their attempts to channel people’s
anger to only their chosen enemies and to confine them to just aspiring for a
greener, more ecologically-conscious ‘dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.’
[\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:1891)

 [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:1816)

It means pushing people to go beyond the horizon that the reformists seek to
restrict them to, and to help empower them to dream of a democratic, because
socialist, alternative. [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:1901)

Herbert Villalon Docena

\*\*\*

Through a dismantling and remodelling of the post-war welfare state, and the
democratic rights associated with it, neoliberal globalisation has unleashed
what might be called capitalism’s law of increasing precarity.

The UK’s convergence with US policies following the dominance of ‘New Right’
thinking during the Reagan and Thatcher years has led to dramatic consequences
relating to inequalities and poverty. Unprecedented cuts to public services and
education, austerity measures and debt-crisis management have become the rule,
rather than an exception.

What is unique about the production and management of precarity is that it has
become central to a much wider range of apparatus that characterise this
historical ‘moment’, designed to serve the purpose of capitalist accumulation
and control. As such, precarity is essential to understanding contemporary
politics and economics.

On the ground, precarity has become entrenched in experiences of life and work.
Although the current UK government continues to laud its ‘success’ in lowering
unemployment rates and increasing (weak) economic growth, this has been
accompanied by a rise in temporary, insecure and precarious work for British and
migrant workers, and draconian cuts to public services.

The production of precarity is based on new forms of power and exploitation that
have become central to the neoliberal logic, according to which the organisation
of social and economic ‘security’ requires precarity as a way of life, both
undermining social justice and eroding the core of democracy itself.

To maintain new forms of hardship at a ‘tolerable’ level, that is, without
risking insurrection, neoliberal advocates need institutions of the welfare
state to create the appearance of shared responsibility.

The multiplication of zero-hour contracts, freelancing, and unpaid internships
are concrete examples of the normalisation of insecurity.

Clearly, by placing risks and responsibilities on the individual that ought to
be shared by all members of society, such as the right to work, precarisation
negates the notion of shared responsibility that is integral to democracy.

While universal suffrage, human rights and welfare entitlements are compatible
with democracy, institutionalised individualisation is not.

When risk becomes a ‘daily necessity’, and the removal of social safety nets
occurs alongside the promotion of a perverse politics of responsibility it soon
becomes clear why the result is an extreme and brutal neglect of vulnerable
people.

In the UK, the normalising of insecurity, through the very institutions designed
to provide welfare and support, is also highlighted in the punitive assessments
of those who receive social benefits and the frequent sanctions imposed that
withdraw benefit from vulnerable people.


We are hirable on demand, available on call, exploitable at will, and firable at
whim.

Due to the hard work of time-stricken activists, an increasingly dense network
of addressing the issue of precarisation is growing, and it is traversing and
conversing across borders significantly, not only in Europe.

It is, after all, collective action and a re-articulation of the conditions in
which we live that will represent the most honourable manifestation of support
for these ideas.

Tom George

\*\*\*

The past five or six years have seen an explosion of political initiatives
around the globe in which tech-minded actors of various kinds have played
leading parts. From whistleblowing to online protests, from occupied squares to
anti-establishment parties, their political actions can no longer be ignored,
particularly following Edward Snowden’s revelations about the mass digital
surveillance capabilities of the US National Security Agency (NSA) and allied
agencies.

Indeed, freedom technologists regard the fate of the internet and of human
freedom as being inextricably entwined.

A good place to start our enquiry into the contribution, if any, of freedom
technologists to progressive political change is Iceland.

A key turning point came on 1 August 2009. The then unknown WikiLeaks had
obtained documentation that exposed the tight grip of cronyism on the country’s
financial system. [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:2207) This incident made WikiLeaks
an instant phenomenon in Iceland.

on 16 June 2010 the Icelandic parliament unanimously passed IMMI as a
resolution.

A team of Icelandic and foreign freedom technologists launched the Icelandic
Modern Media Initiative (IMMI). The aim of IMMI was to strengthen information
freedom both in Iceland and globally.

On 16 June 2010 the Icelandic parliament unanimously passed IMMI as a
resolution.

In 2013 Birgitta Jónsdóttir became the leader of Iceland’s Pirate Party, which
holds only three seats of the national parliament’s 63 but currently leads the
polls in voting intentions for 2017. For people like her, all systems, including
political systems, are there to be continually tinkered with – i.e. hacked – so
that they can be improved.

Spain’s housing market “bubble” had burst in 2008, leaving almost half of the
country’s young people unemployed.

This was also a period of rapid growth in the uptake of social and mobile media
in Spain, with a dramatic increase (65%) in mobile internet usage between 2010
and 2011.The connections and overlaps between Spain’s digital freedom scene and
its indignados (or 15M) movement are numerous.

Although the role played by hackers and other computer experts in lending the
indignados (15M) movement its strong free culture character is crucial, it is
important not to overlook the part played by both amateur and professional
journalists.

The mainstream news media were often portrayed as an integral part of a
monolithic “system” hostile to the protesters, while “citizen journalism” and
other form of “horizontal” and “networked” communication were celebrated.

WikiLeaks had “brought something really good for journalism and for society”.

Podemos is a leftist formation rooted in the indignados (15M) movement and led
by the charismatic political scientist Pablo Iglesias, aged 37.

On 24 May 2015, local elections were held across Spain. In Madrid, Barcelona,
Valencia and other major cities, new anti-establishment candidates either won or
came very close to winning, signalling a major change in the country’s political
landscape.

In Spain’s general elections on the coming 20 December Podemos became the third
political force in Spain with over five million votes, surging to 20.66% of the
total vote, which gave the new political party 69 MPs and put an end to the
country’s two-party system, in place throughout the post-Franco era.

It is the coming together of everyday people, technology nerds and other
political actors via social media, mainstream media and in physical settings
such as streets and squares that drives processes of change.

It is worth noting that Spain boasts what is arguably the world’s most advanced
techno-political field. Even more remarkable, Spain’s civil society has achieved
this leading position while pursuing agendas that are as much concerned with
social justice as they are with liberty.

Arguably, the most urgent issue to tackle precisely how to use our collective
techno-political and research savvy to address the present global system’s
grotesque inequalities. How can the social justice impasse be overcome beyond
these small internet freedom circles?

It is amply clear by now that the so-called digital divide cannot be bridged
through technological means alone, as it must be understood within broader
systems of entrenched social and economic exclusion. Digital rights are not only
human rights, as we often hear in net freedom circles: digital rights are social
rights.

John Postill

\*\*\*

Experiences and experiments in Spain, Brazil, Istanbul and other cities suggest
that a transnational municipalism, based on concepts of an open source city
(free online tools and active citizen participation), has the potential to
regenerate democracy and build a geopolitics of the commons against
neoliberalism.

In June 2015, a 25-year-old called Pedro Kumamoto became Mexico’s first member
of parliament to win a seat without belonging to a political party.

The surge in support for Pedro Kumamoto’s Wikipolítica was matched at a
state-wide level by the Citizens’ Movement, a new political party that won
control of 24 local councils.

On the other side of the Atlantic, in Spain, we find a similar situation with
new municipal governments whose ambition is likewise to go beyond their
established powers.

‘Municipalism’ represents the most visible face of the growing role of cities
and local governments around the world. [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:2462) “Made in
Spain municipalism” has become the first of a series of networked rebellions
started by the Arab Spring.

These two cases also open up the possibility of a global network of cities
working for the commons and challenging the neoliberal order.

All states have done is feed the spiralling public debt, hand over public funds
to the private banking system and downsize themselves through austerity
policies. [\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:2419)

The smart city model created by the big multinationals sees the city’s data as a
commercial product. Furthermore, the way this data is managed is opaque and
lacks transparency.

The relationship between the multinationals and local governments also tends to
be strictly commercial, which contradicts the spirit and practices of public
services.

The ‘Big Society’ idea touted by David Cameron in the UK or the Dutch
government’s community participation projects are to a large extent about
promoting voluntary work by citizens in order justify the disappearance of the
welfare state. To avoid reinforcing this, city autonomies and citizen
self-management and collaboration have a crucial role to act as an incentive for
mutual complementarity between public administration and citizens.

In Madrid, the arrival of Ahora Madrid in local government has opened the way
for a new form of public management of the common good.
[\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:2658)

Furthermore, in the budget drawn up for 2016, the city council has introduced
participatory management of these initiatives by neighbourhood residents.

At the end of 2015, the Madrid city council also approved a regulatory framework
for ceding the use of public spaces to community groups.
[\*](#ASIN:B01BW2ZY6O;LOC:2663)

The combination of ceding public resources and spaces and respect for the
autonomy of social movements could pave the way for a new municipalist model of
cities against the neoliberal state.

What is at stake is the life of neighbourhoods and, at the same time, the
survival of democratic participation worldwide.

Open source local government is the first step towards scaling up new public
policy spheres and interwoven citizen practices that can make neoliberalism
unnecessary.

Bernardo Gutiérrez

\*\*\*

[amzn:B01BW2ZY6O]

