The Candidate: Jeremy Corbyn's Improbable Path to Power
=======================================================

By **Alex Nunns**

The obstacles facing Corbyn as a leader of the left are orders of magnitude
greater than those that confronted Thatcher.

Even if one historical era is giving way to another, that provides no guarantee
that Corbyn or the left can succeed. But when such a rare chance arrives, there
is only one option available: to seize it.

It is easy now to forget the extent to which Ed Miliband’s victory over his
brother David in 2010 was seen as a break from New Labour.

Miliband’s five years in charge was a tale of two trajectories. At the level of
the leadership, he began with a blaze of left rhetoric and became progressively
more cautious.

But below the leadership the trajectory was in the other direction—the
membership moved left over the course of the parliament and the unions embarked
on a conscious project to reshape the party from within.

Compared to the 16 years of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown that preceded him, Ed
Miliband represented a departure.

hip by clearly articulating that the deal at the heart of New Labour was over,
swept away by the tide of history.

hip by clearly articulating that the deal at the heart of New Labour was over,
swept away by the tide of history.

The story of Miliband’s political journey as leader was a gradual shift from his
more radical instincts to “the cautious tactical politics he had learned under
Gordon Brown.

The big story of Miliband’s leadership election was the split sympathies of
party members and trade unionists.

The economy had changed since the crash, making life hard and bleak for many.

A pivotal date was Len McCluskey’s election as general secretary of Unite.

The union set about developing a new ‘political strategy’ to reshape Labour,
officially adopted in summer 2012.

Other unions, in particular the GMB, were following a similar path.

Important to New Labour’s stranglehold on selections was the organisation
Progress.

McCluskey wrote: “It is time for those who want a real alternative… to get
organised in parliament and outside.”

Had Miliband known the true weakness of the Blairites’ position within the party
during his leadership, perhaps history would have been different.

In winter of 2013-14… The resultant Collins introduced new rules for electing
Labour’s leader that would have spectacular unintended consequences. Without it
Jeremy Corbyn could never have become leader.

It was the left, largely shut out of the process, that regarded the Collins
Review as a catastrophe.

The Collins Review was passed by 86 per cent to 14 at a special conference in
March 2014.

Miliband was cast as the victor, but the Blairites felt they were the real
winners.

Much later, once the full horror of what they had done dawned on them, the
Blairites would disown Collins and hang it around Miliband’s neck.

There were two big, looming truths behind Labour’s election defeat. One was that
voters did not trust the party with the economy. The other: they did not know
who or what Labour stood for.

Ed Balls gradually moved towards the Conservative position on the need for more
cuts.

The problem was that Labour actually did not stand for anything very clear.

\*\*\*

Coming out of the election, there was no question that the scale of the task
facing Labour was formidable.

To win a majority in 2020 it would have to gain 94 seats. Unless it could change
the game, it would lose again.

On the eve of its greatest ever success, the Labour left perceived itself to be
at the weakest point in its history.

It was out of weakness that the left selected an unlikely and reluctant
leadership candidate

In the aftermath of the 2015 general election there was a pressing need for some
kind of left mobilisation.

The Corbyn phenomenon of summer 2015 was fused from a nebula of diffuse
activity. One of the earliest elements to become visible to the naked eye was an
online petition calling for an anti-austerity candidate to stand for leader.

It was a sentiment that would only intensify as the contest developed.

It was the Blairites’ hasty and transparent attempt to use the general election
defeat as a springboard to reclaim the party that set the tone.

The Blairites were the ideal villains. Ideologically they exhibited all the
signs of rigor mortis.

One Burnham ally said of his candidate’s disgruntled left supporters: “Where
else do they have to go?” He would soon find out.

Jeremy Corbyn was propelled to the head of the Labour Party by big historical
trends that were years in the making. But there was nothing inevitable about it.

The newly raised threshold requiring a candidate to be nominated by 15 per cent
of Labour MPs was intended precisely to prevent someone like Corbyn joining the
field

It took activism to get Corbyn on the ballot.

They may have only won a place on the ballot, but it had come against such odds
that it felt like a glorious victory. “The PLP nominations were a massive
hurdle—it had been their veto on real party democracy and we’d beaten it.”

Before the mass rallies and before the campaign even got fully up to speed,
Corbyn was ahead.

Corbyn had a great advantage over the other candidates: a unique selling point.
He was the only one who unequivocally opposed the Thatcherite economic consensus
that had failed so badly.

If the other candidates could not bring themselves to oppose Conservative
austerity then suddenly it was they who appeared out of step with Labour
opinion.

Corbyn’s candidacy was a magnet for people who were well used to organising on a
shoestring.

The other candidates did, however, possess the advantage of actually having
campaign offices and staff.

It is evident that Corbyn was not a hard sell. The potential support was already
there; it only needed to be alerted to Corbyn’s existence.

If a significant component of Corbyn’s support came from people who were not
left wing but whose allegiances had shifted due to the consequences of the 2008
crash and the manifest ineptness of the old economic thinking, then what
happened within the Labour Party in 2015 begins to look like a historic turn.

The Corbyn candidacy gave this stratified non-Labour (and, for the most part,
non-party) left the chance to come back together.

There was an obvious explanation for the instant enthusiasm for Corbyn. Along
with Caroline Lucas and John McDonnell, he was one of a tiny handful of
politicians who commanded near-universal respect among grassroots campaigners.

After the claustrophobia of scratching around for nominations in parliamentary
corridors, it was exhilarating to burst out to the big, bright, outside world,
where real politics—the politics of people’s lived experience—was happening.

This activist core provided was a committed base of highly experienced
campaigners, vocal on social media, keyed into left networks, and not shy about
evangelising.

They could “vouch for Jeremy being the real thing, not just another Labour
politician

“There was a movement looking for a home,” says the comedian Mark Steel,
reflecting on the anti-austerity sentiment that propelled Jeremy Corbyn to such
heights.

What became known as the anti-austerity movement in Britain was really a
continuation of a broader struggle against the particular form of aggressive,
free market, finance and consumer-based capitalism that was ushered in by
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan and goes under the ugly name of
neoliberalism.

By the beginning of 2015 the anti-austerity movement was attracting a wide range
of people from well beyond the usual orbit of left activists.

In its search for a home, Labour was the last door the anti-austerity movement
knocked on. Surprisingly, it found it not just unlocked, but wide open.

This was because one of the candidates in the leadership election had impeccable
anti-austerity credentials.

Since 1994 Labour had really been three parties: a neoliberal one, a social
democratic one and a socialist one.

The neoliberal strand, which reigned supreme for so long as New Labour, had by
2015 collapsed. But because this tendency still operated under the shell of
Labour, no one knew. It took a leadership election to find out.

**W**hen the anti-austerity movement rushed into the Labour Party, there was far
less hostility from existing members than might have been expected.

**T**he surprise presence of a left candidate on the leadership ballot meant the
anti-austerity movement had an opportunity to make its home in an established
party.

**S**ections of the Labour Party, epitomised by Corbyn and McDonnell, had been
involved in the anti-austerity movement all along.

It may have been uncharacteristic for the unions to back an outsider like
Corbyn, but with their support he no longer was one.

The decision of Unison to nominate Jeremy Corbyn was a huge moment in the
campaign.

As soon as it began to look like Corbyn could win, the most powerful force of
all was unleashed: hope.

\*\*\*

With a few exceptions, the big names at the Guardian and Observer proved
relentlessly hostile to Corbyn.

A detailed look at the its coverage during the Labour leadership campaign leaves
no doubt that it decided that Corbyn was out of bounds.

Yvette Cooper, Liz Kendall and Andy Burnham were supported, respected and
accepted but the Labour left on the other side had to be stopped.

The more the press lambasted Corbyn, the more his support grew.

The onslaught may have been “horrendous,” but it did not have the desired effect

Perhaps the most important factor explaining why the press onslaught backfired
was the existence of social media.

“Every time the mainstream media attacked Jeremy the social media would get to
the truth of the matter.”

A media narrative asserting that there is no alternative is much easier to
sustain if there is no alternative media.

Events were spinning beyond the media’s control.

\*\*\*

Blair would rather the Tories win than for Labour to succeed from the left.

The Labour Left has always suspected as much of the Blairites, but it is useful
to have it confirmed by their commander-in-chief.

The political force that so dominated Labour from 1994 to 2007 was humiliated in
the summer of 2015. Its candidate, Liz Kendall, could secure the backing of just
4.5 per cent of Labour members and supporters.

Jeremy Corbyn’s rise was rejection—of Tony Blair and New Labour.

Ed Miliband’s victory in 2010, had not been decisive enough. This time it was
emphatic.

The reason for the aura of invincibility that surrounded Progress and the
Blairites was their unparalleled access to a friendly media.

Blogs and social media made it possible for alternative perspectives on party
matters to gain wide currency.

But the Blairites’ biggest problem was ideological. The political programme they
offered was one designed for the 1990s that had ossified into dogma.

“People want Labour to be the party of Hardie and Attlee. They don’t want the
party of Blair and Brown.”

The remarkable thing about the humiliation of the Blairites was that they did
not see it coming.

The inescapable truth confronting the Blairites was that there was no appetite
for their message.

The exhaustion of Blairism and its refusal to either adapt or die was a major
impetus behind Corbyn’s rise.

Presented with a candidate in favour of party democracy, members seized the
opportunity.

The election of Corbyn was, “a massive ‘vote no’ to New Labour and everything it
stood for.”

What the press pejoratively labelled ‘Corbynmania’ was the emergence of a new
political movement.

It was no surprise that the phenomenon was accompanied by relentless attacks
from the Labour Party establishment.

The defining characteristic of the burgeoning Corbyn phenomenon was that it was
participative.

People who showed up at a Corbyn rally felt they were part of the making of a
movement.

His line of libertarian socialism aspired to the radical democratisation of
society and the economy, rejecting unaccountable top-down power whether wielded
by an over-mighty corporation or a paternalistic state bureaucracy.

Corbyn excited people by offering them the opportunity to shape politics
themselves for the first time in decades.

Overarching all of these positions was perhaps Corbyn’s most cherished
aspiration of all: to restore democracy to Labour’s policy-making process,
allowing the membership to determine the direction of the party.

That ethos really the essence of Corbyn’s entire campaign.

**There was no** mistaking the message—every aspect was about inviting people to
take part.

His campaign was not an exercise in political positioning, but a serious attempt
to harness a movement.

This was evidence of an emphatic turn against New Labour politics. The shift was
not only coming from outside, but from within.

And that shared objective was to change the direction of the Labour Party by
electing not a demagogue with a pre-prepared plan, but a self-effacing democrat
offering people the chance to shape the future themselves.

**\*\*\***

Foreign policy was the terrain upon which the Labour elite and the media mounted
their fiercest attacks on Corbyn.

Corbyn had gone so far as to ask: “What is security? Is security the ability to
bomb, maim, kill, destroy, or is security the ability to get on with other
people and have some kind of respectful existence with them?” This man had to be
stopped.

For his entire political life, Corbyn had been an anti-war internationalist and
a human rights advocate.

He was one of the very few MPs to protest the gassing of the Kurds in Halabja in
1988 by Saddam Hussein when the dictator was still a British ally, and led calls
for the suspension of the arms trade with Iraq.

Corbyn’s international worldview may have been anathema to the establishment,
inside and outside Labour, but not to many party members.

A big part of his constituency was made up of returning and existing members who
were still sickened by the shame of Iraq.

They were more interested in Corbyn’s pledge to apologise on behalf of the
Labour Party for the Iraq War. Corbyn was able to make good on his promise.

**\*\*\***

Jeremy Corbyn’s victory on 12 September 2015 was a staggering achievement; an
extraordinary moment; an unprecedented event in the history of British politics.

**T**he result was a super-sized endorsement for Corbyn. His 59.5 per cent beat
Tony Blair’s 57 per cent from 1994

**S**aid Corbyn on the day. “It is a mandate for the issues that I have put
forward during the election and a mandate for new democracy in the party.”

For thousands of people, the result was a reason get involved in the Labour
Party. 15,500 joined as full members in the first 24 hours of Corbyn’s
leadership.

**T**he political movement around Corbyn had just pulled off the upset of the
century.

“We knew that the shit was going to hit the fan the next day.”

Building a shadow ministerial team with little more than a day to complete the
job, is what might be called a nightmare.

The final shadow cabinet appointments were made the following day. Corbyn had
delivered his promise to reach across Labour’s political spectrum.

He had appointed more women than men. McDonnell was shadow chancellor and yet
the sky had not fallen in.

Most shadow cabinet members could only manage nine months of service before
resigning in an attempt to subvert the democratic choice of the party.

Corbyn had made it. He was Labour leader. He had appointed a shadow cabinet. He
was heading to his first meeting with the PLP. Now all the trouble started.

There is only one intention: “to break him as a man.” That is the view of Diane
Abbott as she watches her parliamentary colleagues take turns to spit venom at
Jeremy Corbyn.

\*\*\*

It is 27 June 2016, nine and a half months since Corbyn addressed his first
Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) meeting as leader. MPs are determined to ensure
this will be his last.

The long-anticipated coup against Corbyn is in full swing.

MP after MP stands up to attack their leader in “the most contemptuous terms
possible:A non-Corbyn supporting MP has “never seen anything so horrible”

“You are not fit to be prime minister”, Bridget Phillipson tells Corbyn.

“You need to go for the sake of the party,” remarks Ivan Lewis.

“You are a critical threat to the future of the Labour Party,” chimes in Jamie
Reed.

The tirade continues for over an hour. Nobody talks about Corbyn’s politics;

A non-Corbyn supporting MP has “never seen anything so horrible”

The ‘Keep Corbyn’ rally has been called with just 24 hours’ notice. As one
shadow cabinet minister after another resigned their post on Sunday 26 June

The coup has been taking place in the anti-democratic arena of the TV studios.

Now the square is jam-packed. It has been announced from the stage that the
police estimate 10,000 are here.

Now they are hearing from Dennis Skinner, “I see the greatest crowd since the
miners won in 1974,” he declares. “We’ve got a battle on to save Jeremy as the
leader of the Labour Party.”

As if on cue, the man himself appears into view. The roar from Parliament Square
is deafening. Everyone has their hands above their heads clapping.

His survival is necessary for their survival as a political force.

When he refuses to let a small part of the Labour Party impose its will on the
rest, he is defending the project that all those came together to build just the
previous summer.

The defining feature of the coup was that it was anti-democratic. Iwas an
attempt by two power centres within Labour—the PLP and the party bureaucracy—to
cancel the democratic choice that party members and supporters had made.

The baton was handed on to the party machine, which moved to keep the leader off
the ballot and suspend all local party meetings.

In taking these actions Labour Party officials exposed the role they had long
been playing as a centre of resistance to Corbyn.

Working hand in hand with elements of the National Executive Committee the party
bureaucracy used every trick in the book to secure the ouster of the leader.

Orchestrating all this was the custodian of the machine, Labour’s general
secretary Iain McNicol.

In the end, by 18 votes to 14, the NEC voted that the leader should be on the
ballot automatically.

But the machine had a fallback position.

Since the onset of the coup Labour had experienced the most rapid membership
surge in British political history.

The NEC proceeded to vote on a “special paper” meaning only members who had
joined the Labour Party before 12 January 2016 would be able to vote.

Two other important decisions were reached. First, the fee to become a
registered supporter was hiked from the £3 it had been in 2015 to £25.

Second, the NEC took the extraordinary step of banning all CLP and branch
meetings for the duration of the leadership contest, effectively shutting down
the party.

The legacy of pulling such blatant administrative manoeuvres was the branding of
Corbyn’s opponents as bad losers who placed little value on democracy.

It was as if the coup had cracked open the casing around the party machine,
making its inner workings visible for all to see.

Mighty as the troika of the PLP, the machine and the media seemed, Jeremy Corbyn
was able to see off the coup.

The issue at the heart of the coup concerned where power lay in the Labour
Party. Was it with the PLP, as had historically been the case, or was it with
the membership?

Politically, Corbyn was only able to defy the coup because of the legitimacy he
took from the members.

In contrast to the flexible, responsive membership, the parliamentary party was
largely a relic from the New Labour era.

Where most constituencies are safe seats, many MPs can have what are effectively
jobs for life if their party has no recall process in place, such as mandatory
reselection.

Members had elected Corbyn in part because of his promise of an open,
participatory politics. The PLP was explicitly attempting to veto that vision.

In response to Margaret Hodge announcing her plan for a motion of no confidence,
a “vote of confidence in Jeremy Corbyn was started on the 38 degrees campaigning
website.

Within two hours of the petition going live 45,000 people had signed. By 9 p.m.
the total had risen to over 100,000. .

The following day, Corbyn was able to answer questions about his leadership by
pointing to the 150,000 signatures to the petition

By 1 July over quarter of a million people had signed the public vote of
confidence, more than had voted for Corbyn in the 2015 leadership contest.

Despite MPs’ protestations that their concern was to have a more “competent”
leader, in reality the objective of the mutiny was to defeat a left movement
threatening to remake the party

For such a movement to arise not in opposition to a war or a bad government, but
in favour of “a new kind of politics,” proposing no less than to overturn the
political and economic orthodoxy of the previous 35 years, was a remarkable
historical event. For that movement to find expression inside the principal
party of opposition, taking as its figurehead a reluctant leader who had to be
pushed into the role, was without parallel.

The spectacular story of Corbyn’s rise serves as a vivid demonstration that, as
the new leader said in his victory speach on the 12th of September 2015, “things
can, and they will, change.”

