The Cost Of Equality
====================

By **Stewart Lansley**

Over the last three decades, Britain, the United States and a rising number of
other nations have divided into a two-track economy. It is the first track, the
one which makes money out if money, that has provided a super-fast route to
personal wealth. The ‘money economy’ has and still is used to deliver big
returns to those who control it – a small, powerful group of a few thousand top
bankers, financiers and corporate executives running the world’s largest
companies.

Nearly everyone else, in contrast, has ended up in the second track – the slow
lane of the economy. This track – the ‘productive economy’ where businesses are
built, new products devised and wealth and jobs created – is the one on which
economic success depends. It produces the goods and services that make up
economic output, provides the jobs for the bulk of the workforce and creates the
wealth that enables living standards to rise. But while the first track if
thriving, this one is floundering.

Actively supported by successive governments over three decades…the money
economy has captured the dominant position, greatly out of proportion to the
needs of the wider economy. In the process, finance has come to play a new role
– that of a cash cow for the domestic and global super rich.

For two decades, Britain’s economic strategy had been built on a triple-formula
– high and rising consumption, a low and declining wage share and soaring levels
of borrowing. This model may have helped maintain growth and employment levels,
but only by stroking property values and creating a debt mountain larger that in
any of the other rich nations. It was an unsustainable model that finally
imploded in the autumn of 2007.

The failure of Lehman Brothers had much to do with excessive executive rewards.
In the UK, the obsession with fast returns also contributed to the
under-investment and the nation’s poor record on competitiveness. Both dividend
payments and executive rewards came to assume a greater priority over capital
investment in the UK compared with competitors, even though this was rarely in
the medium or longer term interest of the shareholders or companies.

The world in now locked into the most prolonged economic downturn for eighty
years. Britain – along with much of the rich world – is facing an apparently
intractable slump.

Despite the depth of the crisis, our policy makers are clueless about how to
tackle it. There is one central explanation for this. The source of the problem
continues to be misdiagnosed.

Britain, it is argued, needs a sharp dose of austerity to get itself out of this
mess. It is a formula first promoted by Andrew Mellon, the US Treasury Secretary
at the time of the 1929 Crash. This analysis is fundamentally wrong. Austerity
is making the situation much worse than it needs to be. There is plenty of money
in the system – it is simply in the wrong places and doing the wrong things.

The real cause of the present crisis is the way the economic cake has been
increasingly unequally divided. While the workforce has been left with a
shrinking share of the nation’s output, the lion’s share of growth has been
colonised by big business and the very rich.

While ordinary households are being squeezed, other parts of the economy are
awash with money. Britain’s top 1000 super rich are sitting on fortunes worth
£250 billion more than in 2000. While many small and medium companies have been
badly hit by the downturn, the UK’s top 100 companies added a combined £20
billion in cash in 2011, a rise of a fifth over 2010.

The result of this imbalance is economic paralysis. While the workforce is
denied spending power the leaders of corporate Britain are allowing these near-
record surpluses to stand mostly idle. There is enough money to kick-start the
economy. It needs to be harnessed.

The lesson is clear. Economic inequality not merely drove is over the cliff on
2008, it is now sabotaging economic recovery. The solution? A much more equal
society.

