The Enigma of Capitalism
========================
![](/bookimg/theenigmaofcapitalism.jpg)

How then are we to interpret the current mess? Does this crisis signal, for
example, the end of free-market neoliberalsim as a dominant economic model for
capitalist development? The answer depends on what is meant by the word
neoliberalsim. My view is that it refers to a class project that coalesced in
the crisis of the 1970’s.  Masked by a lot of rhetoric about individual
freedoms, liberty, personal responsibility and the virtues of privatisation, the
free market and free trade, it legitimised draconian policies designed to
restore and consolidate capitalist class power.  This project has been
successful, judging by the incredible centralisation of wealth and power
observable in all those countries that took the neoliberal road.

One of the basic pragmatic principals that emerged in the 1980’s, for example,
was that state power should protect financial institutions at all costs.

Put crudely, the policy was: privatise profits and socialise risks; save the
banks and put the screws on the people.

Banks behave badly because they do not have to be responsible for the negative
consequences of high-risk behaviour.  The current bailout is the same old story,
only bigger…

Current policies propose to exit the crisis with a further consolidation and
centralisation of capitalist class power.

As Andrew Mellon (US banker, Secretary of the Treasury 1921-32) once famously
remarked, ‘In a crisis, assets return to their rightful owners’ (i.e. him).  And
it will be the same this time unless an alternative political movement arises to
stop it.

This does not mean that they are not going to redesign the financial
architecture because they must. But who are they going to redesign it for?

Will the powers that currently hold sway seek merely to clean up the problems at
popular expense and then give the banks back to the class interests that got us
into the mess?  This is almost certainly where we are headed unless a surge of
political opposition dictates otherwise.

Meanwhile, the big banks that remain are stashing away funds to resume payment
of the huge bonuses they paid before the crash.

Whether we can get out of this crisis in a different way depends very much upon
the balance of class forces. It depends upon the degree to which the mass of the
population rises up and says, ‘Enough is enough, let’s change this system.’ 

Alan Budd, Thatcher’s chief economic advisor, later admitted that ‘the 1980’s
polices of attaching inflation by squeezing the economy and public spending were
a cover to bash the workers’ and so create an ‘industrial reserve army’ which
would undermine the power of labour and permit capitalists to make easy profit
ever after.’ 

Labour availability is no problem now for capital, and it has not been for the
last twenty-five years.  But disempowered labour means low wages, and
impoverished workers... But inflation in asset values cannot go on forever. Now
it is the turn of the United States to experience the pain of falling asset
values, even as US policy makers do their level best to export their perverse
versions of capitalism to the rest of the world.

In a desperate attempt to find more places to put the surplus capital, a wave of
privatisation swept round the world carried on the backs of the dogma that
sate-run enterprises are by definition inefficient and lax and that the only way
to improve their performance is to pass them over to the private sector.  This
dogma does not stand up to any detailed scrutiny. Some state-run enterprises are
indeed inefficient and some are not. Travel the French train network and compare
it to the pathetically privatised US and British systems.  And nothing could
possibly be more inefficient and profligate than the privately insured health
care system in the United Sates. 

Government polices have exacerbated rather than assuaged the problem. The term
‘bail-out’ is inaccurate. Taxpayers are simply bailing out the banks, the
capitalist class, forgiving then their debts, their transgressions, and only
theirs. And the banks are using the money, not to lend to anybody but to reduce
their leveraging and to buy other banks.  They are busy consolidating their
power.

The problem is that the economic theories and orthodoxies, which manifestly
failed to predict the crisis, continue to inform our debates, dominate our
thinking and underpin political action.  Without challenging these dominant
mental conceptions there can be no alternative (as Margaret Thatcher liked to
say) other than a botched return to the sort of capitalism that got us into this
mess in the first place.

The capital-labour relation always plays a central role in the dynamics of
capitalism and my lie at the root of the crisis. But these days the main problem
lies in the fact that capital is too powerful and labour too weak, rather than
the other way around.

With one of the largest public budgets at that time (1975) in the capitalist
world, New York City, surrounded by sprawling affluent suburbs, went broke.  The
local situation, orchestrated by an uneasy alliance between state power and
financial institutions, pioneered the neoliberal ideological and practical
political turn that was to be deployed worldwide in the struggle to perpetuate
and consolidate capitalist power.  The recipe was simply enough: crush the power
of labour, institute wage repression, let the market do its work, all the while
putting the power of the state at the service of capital in general and if
investment finance in particular.  This was the solution of the 1970s that lies
at the root of the crisis of 2008-9.

The neoliberal movement that began in the 1970s, for example, constituted a
radical ideological assault upon what the state should be about. To a degree it
was successful (and often is was not), it led a wide-ranging state-sponsored
changes in daily life (the promotion of individualism and an ethic of personal
responsibility against a background of diminishing state provision), as well as
in the dynamics of capital accumulation.  Margaret Thatcher dissolved the London
City Council in 1986 because it resisted her neoliberalising project…

One of the key transformations that occurred in the character of the state after
the mid 1970s was the devolution of powers to local administrations.  Controlled
devolution turned out to be one of the very best means to exercise and
consolidate centralised control. 

At times of crisis, the irrationality of capitalism becomes plain for all to
see.  Surplus capital and surplus labour exist side by side with seemingly no
way to put them back together in the midst of intense human suffering and unmet
needs. In the midsummer of 2009, one third of the capital equipment in the
United States stood idle, while some 17% of the workforce were either
unemployed, enforced part-timers or ‘discouraged’ workers. What could be more
irrational that that?

In effect, the neoliberal revolution succeeded in privatising the production of
the surplus. It liberated capital producers from constraints – including
geographical constraints – and in the process undermined the progressive
redistributive character of state functions.  This produced the rapid increase
in social inequality. 

The central problem to be addressed is clear enough. Compound growth for ever is
not possible and the troubles that beset the world these last thirty years
signal that a time is looming to continuous capital accumulation that cannot be
transcended except by creating fictions that cannot last.  Add to this the facts
that so many people in the world live in conditions of abject poverty, that
environmental degradations are spiralling out of control, that human dignities
are everywhere being offended even as the rich are piling up more and more
wealth under their command, and that the levers of political, institutional,
judicial, military and media power are under such tight dogmatic political
control as to be incapable of doing much more than perpetuating the status
quo.  

Yet the absolute necessity for a coherent anti-capitalist revolutionary movement
must also be recognised. The fundamental aim of that movement has to be to
assume social command over both the production and the distribution of
surpluses.

Designing a society without capital accumulation is no different in principle to
designing a city without cars.  Why can’t we all just work alongside each other
without class distinction?

Universities continue to promote the same useless courses on neoclassical
economics or rational choice political theory as if nothing has happened and the
vaunted business schools simply add a course or two on business ethics or how to
make money out of other people’s bankruptcies. After all, the crisis arose out
of human greed and nothing can be done about that.

The current knowledge structure is clearly dysfunctional and equally clearly
illegitimate. The only hope is that a new generation of perceptive students (in
the broad sense of those who seek to know the world) will clearly see this and
insist of changing it.

The first lesson it must lean is that an ethical, non-exploitive and socially
just capitalism that redounds to the benefit of all is impossible.  It
contradicts the very nature of what capitalism is about.

The great betrayal of the intellectuals who became so complicitous with
neoliberal politics from the 1980’s onwards has first to be reversed before any
meaningful alliances can be constructed with the deprived and the dispossessed.

It seems sometimes as if there is a systematic plan to expel low-income and
unwanted populations from the face of the earth.

The wave of financialisation that occurred after the mid-1970’s has been
spectacular for its predatory practices style. Stock promotions, and market
manipulations; Ponzi schemes and corporate fraud; asset stripping through
mergers and acquisitions; the promotion of debt incumbency that reduces whole
populations, even in the advanced capitalist countries, to debt peonage;
disposition of assets (the raiding of pension funds and their decimation by
stock and corporate collapses) – all these features are central to what
contemporary capitalism is about.

Crisis may be, for this reason, orchestrated, managed and controlled to
rationalise the irrational system that is capitalism.  This is what the
state-administered austerity programmes, making use of the key levers of
interest rates and the credit system, are often all about. 

Deliberate provocation of crisis by state policies and collective corporate
actions is a dangerous game. While there is no evidence of active and narrow
conspiracies to create such a crisis, there are plenty of influential ‘Chicago
School’ macroeconomists and economic policy makers around the world, along with
all sorts of entrepreneurial opportunists, who believe that a good bout of
creative destruction is required now and again for capitalism to survive and for
the capitalist class to be reformed. They hold that attempts by governments to
ward off crises with stimulation packages and the like are profoundly
misguided.  Better by far, they say, to let a market-led ‘structural adjustment’
process (of the sort typically mandated by the IMF) do its work. Such medicine
is necessary to keep capitalism economically healthy.  The closer capitalism
gets to its death’s door, the more painful the medicine.  The trick is to not to
let the patient die.

The present economic difficulties both in the US and Britain, as well as
throughout Europe, are essentially being deepened for a political reason rather
than out of economic necessity.  That political reason is the desire to have
done with capital’s responsibility to cover the costs of social reproduction.

There is, evidently, a grand divide in the political strategy emerging. Much of
the West is perusing the holy grail of deficit reduction (resulting in
reductions in standards of living) through austerity, while the East, along with
the emerging markets of the South, follows an expansionary Keynesian strategy. 
If global growth is to revive, them it will be because the Eastern path of
Keynesian stimulus prevails.

The logic of endless capital accumulation of endless growth is always with us. 
It internalises hidden imperatives, of which the invisible hand of the market is
but one, to which we either willingly or mindlessly submit, no matter our
ethical inclinations.

And while it may seem perversely appropriate to condemn North America and Europe
to slow growth and endless austerity, this is only done in the name of defending
the privileges of the plutocracy and goes nowhere when it comes to…the
impossibility of endless compound growth.

The problem of endless compound growth through endless capital accumulation will
have to be confronted and overcome.  This is the political necessity of our
times.

[amzn:B004V9OAH0]

