The Great Work
==============
We live in cities, in a world of concrete and steel, of wheels and wires, a
world of unending work. We seldom see the stars at night or the planets or the
moon. Even in the day we do not experience the sun in any immediate or
meaningful manner. Summer and winter are the same inside the mall. Ours is a
world of highways, parking lots, and shopping centres. We read books written
with a strangely contrived human alphabet. We no longer read the Book of Nature.


So completely are we at odds with the planet that brought us into being that we
have become strange beings indeed. We dedicate enormous talent and knowledge and
research in developing a human order disengaged from and even predatory on the
very sources from whence we came and upon which we depend every moment of our
existence. We initiate our children into an economic order based on exploitation
of the natural life systems of the planet.


Once we recognise that a change from a human-centred to an Earth-centred norm of
reality and value is needed, we might ask how this is to be achieved and how it
would function. We might begin by recognising that the life community, the
community of all living species, including humans, is the greater reality and
the greater value. The primary concern of the human community must be the
preservation and enhancement of this comprehensive community, even for the sake
of its own survival.


The industrial establishment is an extreme expression of a patriarchal tradition
with its all-pervasive sense of dominance, whether of rulers over people, of men
over women, of humans over nature. Only with enormous psychic and social effort
and revolutionary processes has this patriarchal control been mitigated as
regards the rights of women. The rights of the natural world of living beings
are still at the mercy of the modern industrial corporation as the universal
expression of patriarchal dominance over the entire planetary process.


The ecologist, with a greater sense of the human as a nurturing presence within
the larger community of the geological and biological modes of Earth being, is
sponsoring a mode of human activity much closer to the feminine than the
masculine modes of being and activity.


We have invented a counterproductive society that is now caught in the loop that
feeds back onto itself in what can presently be considered a runaway situation.


The media and advertising are particularly responsible for placing the entire
life process of the human in a situation wherein producer and consumer feed back
into each other in an ever-accelerated process. Presently we experience on a
world scale an enormous glut in many basic products, along with unmatched
deprivation in the vast numbers of peoples gathered in the shantytowns of the
world.


We might now recover our sense of the maternal aspect of the universe in the
symbol of the Great Mother, especially in the Earth as that maternal principal
out of which we are born and by which we are sustained. Once this symbol is
recovered the dominance of the patriarchal principal that has brought such
aggressive attitudes into our activities will be mitigated. If this is achieved
then our relationship with the natural world would undergo one of the most
radial readjustments since the origins of our civilisation in classical
antiquity.


Not only is this devastation of the natural world due to an industrial economy
that is willing to wreck the entire planet for financial gain or some so-called
improvement in the human condition. It is due to the American Constitution,
which guarantees to humans participatory governance, individual freedoms, and
rights to own and dispose of property – all with no legal protection for the
natural world. The jurisprudence supporting such a constitution is profoundly
deficient. It provides no basis for the functioning of the planet as an integral
community that would include all its human and other-than-human components. Only
a jurisprudence based on concern for an integral Earth community is capable of
sustaining a viable planet.


Because of this basic attitude we consider that the more extensively we use the
world around us, the more progress we are making towards some higher state of
being. The ideal is to take the greatest possible amount of natural resources,
process those recourses put them through the consumer economy as quickly as
possible, then onto the waste heap. This we consider as progress – even though
the immense accumulation of junk is overwhelming the landscape, saturating the
skies, and filling the oceans.


For children to live only in contact with concrete and steel and wires and
wheels and machines and computers and plastics, to seldom experience any
primordial reality or even see the stars at night, is a soul deprivation that
diminishes the deepest of their human experiences.


Already the planet is so damaged and the future so challenged by its rising
human pollution that the terms of survival will be severe beyond anything we
have know in the past.


We have such vast understanding of the universe and how it functions, and yet we
manifest such inability to use this knowledge beneficially either for ourselves
or for any other mode of earthly being.


Our economics is based on our mechanised exploitation of the Earth in all of its
geo- biological systems. Commercial rights to profit prevail over urgent needs
of natural systems to survive. Disengagement from such exclusive commitments to
human exploitation requires an ethical stance and a courage of execution seldom
found in our contemporary human societies.


We find ourselves ethically destitute just when, for the first time, we are
faced with ulitmacy, the irreversible closing down of the Earth’s functioning in
its major life systems. Our ethical traditions know how to deal with suicide,
homicide, and even genocide; but these traditions collapse entirely when
confronted with biocide, the extinction of the vulnerable life systems of the
Earth, and genocide, the devastation of the Earth itself.


The tensions created will be ultimately be even more severe than the
capitalist-Communist tension that dominated political-social activities of the
human community from the publication of *The Communist Manifesto* in 1848 until
1991, when the Soviet collapse occurred and left the capitalist world and its
market economy in control.


Such issues require a reorientation of all the professions, especially the legal
profession, which is still preoccupied with individual “human” rights,
especially with the limitless freedom to acquire property and exploit the land.
Universities are still preparing students for professional careers in the
industrial-commercial world even as this world continues its planetary
destruction. The medical profession is only beginning to recognise that no
amount of medical technology will enable us to have healthy humans on a sick
planet.


What we propose here is not a solution to an issue but a clarification of the
fact that the real issue before us is no longer finding expression in terms of
liberal and conservative but rather in terms of the ecologist or the
environmentalist on one hand and the commercial-industrial establishment on the
other. A new alignment of forces is taking place throughout every institution
and every profession in our society.


As long as these corporations continue in their relentless exploitation of the
planet through their oil wells, their automobile manufacturing, their chemical
compounds, logging projects, road building, and their assaults on the marine
life of the seas, then the biosystems of the planet will continue to be
extinguished. The entire range of life development for the past 65 million years
will be threatened.


Accomplishment of a programme of integral survival of the planet, and of the
human community, requires that the dominant profit motivation of the corporation
endeavour be replaced with a dominant concern for the integral life community.
To seek benefit for humans by devastating the planet is not an acceptable
project.


The tension among corporations drives each to greater intensity of activity as
they rival, threaten, and support one another. This mutual support amid the
stress if their diversity is what constitutes the ‘market economy’. They are
dependent on the same recourse base, the same citizenry, the same media
technologies. They are served by each other. They are committed to the same
market economy. They have the same opposition to any national or international
government regulation. They are especially resistant to any restraints on their
activities based on protection of the environment.


None of the political empires of past ages had anything like the control over
land and peoples now held by the more powerful corporations of the twentieth
century, nor has any economic system had such effective technologies for
exploiting the resources of the planet.


From its beginning until the present, the corporation has proclaimed that public
well-being could only be attained through a prosperous industrial, commercial
and financial establishment whose benefits were freely appropriated by the
managerial and ownership class, with minimal payment to those who provided the
labour and the skills needed for the process.


Because the corporations had such power to resist any regulation by the
government, they prospered though legal and illegal use of public funds and
public properties, such as the forests for logging, the rivers for damming, the
mountains for mining, the grasslands for grazing. Much of this was through using
influence on the legislatures of the country and by direct and indirect
pressures exerted on the judiciary and the administration, largely though
manipulation of the media.


Three terms have evolved in recent times to describe the work of the
corporations: corporate libertarianism, corporate welfare and corporate
colonialism.


The term *corporate libertarianism* refers to the insistence of the corporation
on the freedom to carry on its work as seems best in any manner not explicitly
forbidden by law.


The term *corporate welfare* means that the government best serves itself, the
people and the well being of society by using public resources to support the
work for the work of the industrial or commercial corporations.


One of the main achievements in the period after World War 2 has been the return
of political independence to various peoples of the world in countries that had
been taken over by the more industrial countries of the world. Now, however,
through new free trade policies the former political colonies have become
economic colonies controlled largely by the transnational corporations through
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. This new situation is
designated as *corporate colonialism.*


As we reflect on this imposition of the immense global corporations trying to
take over the responsibility for ‘feeding the world’, we can only wonder at the
reduction of the people of the Earth to a condition of being nurse-maided by
some few corporation enterprises. We might conclude that Mother Monsanto with
her sterile seeds wishes to take over the role of Mother Nature herself.


The corporations control our minds through their ownership or influence over the
public media. They dominate governments by their financial support of selected
candidates of political office and the constant pressures they exert on the
legislation through lobbying. In this manner the oppose legislation to restrict
corporations and support legislation to support corporations, funds now referred
to as corporate welfare. The extent of such corporate welfare, on a global
scale, is sometimes estimated at well over $100 billion annually.


We are now in a new historical situation. The forces that we are concerned with
have control not simply over the human component of the planet but over the
planet itself, considered as a assemblage of natural resources available to
whatever human establishment proves itself capable of possession and
exploitation.


Our schools of business administration at the present time teach the skills
whereby the greatest possible amount of natural resources are processed as
quickly as possible, put through the consumer economy and passed on to the junk
heap, where they remain useless at best and at worse toxic to every living
being.


The horrendous fact is that we are, as Cambridge University biologist Norman
Myers has indicated, in an extinction spasm that is likely to produce ‘the
greatest single setback to life’s abundance and diversity since the first
flickering of life almost four billion years ago’. The labour and care expended
over some billions of years and untold billions of experiments to bring forth
such a gorgeous Earth is all being negated within less than a century for what
we consider ‘progress’ towards a better life in a better world.


But while this peril is cause for concern, it is also a cause for advancing
consciousness. Responsible people no longer think of the world simply as a
collection of natural resources. We have begun to realise that the Earth is an
awesome mystery; intimately as fragile as we ourselves are fragile. But our
responsibility to the Earth is not simply to preserve it; it is to be present to
the Earth in its next sequence of transformations. While we were unknowingly
carried through the evolutionary process in former centuries, the time has come
when we must in some sense guide and energise the process ourselves.

