The Great Tax Robbery: How Britain Became a Tax Haven for Fat Cats and Big Business
===================================================================================
When a tax system favours an elite over the majority it is fatally undermined.


One bizarre episode best illustrates the gap between the technocratic view of
tax avoidance and the real world. In 2002 the chairman of the Inland Revenue
repeatedly told a Parliamentary Select Committee that the sale of 650 tax
offices to a Bermuda-resident company, Mapeley Steps Ltd, did not involve tax
avoidance. But when the MPs came to question Mapeley’s chief executive some
weeks later, he admitted the company had ‘structured its tax affairs to minimise
exposure to capital gains tax’. The committee declined to enter the make-believe
world in which going offshore to ‘minimise exposure’ to tax was not avoiding
tax: ‘Tax avoidance was clearly one of Mapeley’s objectives in the way the deal
was structured,’ it concluded. What independent MPs thought was clearly tax
avoidance was, officially, nothing of the sort.


It is only against the limited band of ‘artificial avoidance’ that the
government makes any meaningful move, but this is enough to sustain the Great
Illusion at the heart of recent governments’ tax policies. Like any decent table
magician, successive chancellors direct the audience’s attention to what they
want it to see while away from the punters’ gaze the trick is played. Artificial
avoidance meeting the official definition is very publicly tackled, while more
quietly the opportunities for some, especially the biggest companies, to
‘structure’ their way out of a tax bill are expanded. As a result, the biggest
corporate tax avoiders no longer need to design their own schemes; the
government does it for them.


The central issue in British tax avoidance today is a political one; it is
nothing less than the legal sanctioning of real world tax avoidance.


The gap widens in two ways. First, clear flaws in tax law are not corrected when
they give undue tax advantages to business.


Second, the rules of the game are relaxed to render real world tax avoidance
increasingly irresistible to the rich and large corporations.


In 2000, Chancellor Gordon Brown responded to the demands of his new friends in
the world of private equity by reducing capital gains tax from 40% to 10%. The
income that with some basic financial engineering they transformed into capital
gains would famously be taxed at lower rates than their cleaners were paying.


The coalition government swiftly followed up with tax exemptions for companies’
tax haven branches and for profits parked in tax haven subsidiary companies in
the most contrived manner. At the same time, the Treasury persists with allowing
tax breaks for the costs of funding these offshore set-ups from the UK. In other
words, income can be moved to tax havens and costs kept in the UK: a deliciously
simple recipe for real world tax avoidance.


Between 1999 and 2011 British companies’ profits increased by 58%, while
corporation tax payments went up by less than 5%.


This pervasive, expanding tax avoidance does more than just short-change
government finances. Available almost exclusively to wealthy companies and
individuals, it widens inequality. It also distorts the democratic process.


In the wake of a crisis that nearly collapsed the world economy, they’re still
attacking tax revenues and distorting economies. They give tax advantages to
economy-swamping levels of debt and bankers’ bonuses based on illusory profits
that conceal sometimes cataclysmic risks. What’s more, they’re being sharpened
by the British government.


As well as facing less than zealous policing of existing laws, big business can
increasingly set its own new ones. The most infuriating aspect of this to those
of us who like to report the furtive capture of the machinery of government by
powerful vested interests is that there’s no secret about it. The Treasury’s
mission is unashamedly to adjust the framework of tax legislation to suit large
business. Thus ‘working groups’ set up to revise laws governing profits shifted
into tax havens are run by the companies, such as Vodafone and Tesco, that seek
to save fortunes by doing precisely this.


The current government nonetheless insists that ‘the consensus, among economists
at least, is that it’s predominantly the employee who foots the bill’, and uses
the misconception of a few academics funded by big corporations to justify
ultra-low corporate tax rates and the introduction of a whole new world of tax
avoidance opportunity. By 2014, it boasts, Britain will have ‘the lowest
[corporate tax] rate [21%] of any major western economy, one of the most
competitive rates in the G20, and the lowest rate this country has ever seen’.
And by sending profits into the world’s tax havens with the government’s
encouragement, British multinationals will shave further billions off already
modest tax bills.


Even giving some credence to the overblown notion of ‘tax competition’ among
nations, quite why the world’s seventh largest economy should sell itself so
cheaply looks like a mystery (but is in fact explained simply by the corporate
capture of tax lawmaking).


The cost of this capitulation will of course be passed on to other taxpayers,
both individuals and the small businesses that can’t afford the lawyers and
accountants to run offshore outposts. By massively reducing their tax bills,
large companies will win yet another competitive advantage over the smaller
enterprises that ought to be the engine of economic recovery.


They could of course constitute legitimate behaviour only in a country where the
richest corporations are not just permitted to dodge their fair contributions
but are positively encouraged to do so, leaving everybody else to pick up the
tab. Such a nation might be called a tax haven. Or it might be called Britain.


As late as 1975 an appalled taxpayer reported to Chancellor Denis Healey that
while his government was clamping down on tax dodging, at a tax conference in
Jersey a Bank of England official ‘was giving advice on how to avoid tax. I
wonder if this is really part of the Bank of England’s duties?’


The Rossminster affair has a special place in tax folklore as the genesis of
artificial tax avoidance, in which tax laws are contorted beyond all recognition
to produce results entirely at odds with their purpose.


Rossminster undermined the whole basis of taxation: that people and companies
would be taxed on their real incomes and gains and that their personal and
commercial dealings would determine what those were. In Rossminster’s world this
reality was replaced with one in which tax liabilities vanished with the wave of
a tax planner’s wand.


From 1979 Margaret Thatcher’s government began implementing the monetarism and
financial deregulation advocated by the ‘Chicago school’ of economic theory and
championed here by the new prime minister’s favoured think tanks such as the
Institute for Economic Affairs. Her first and perhaps most significant move was
the abolition of exchange controls, the system of currency regulation designed
to prevent destabilizing inward and outward flows of finance. Soon followed by
the removal of credit controls and the ‘Big Bang’ deregulation of the City, the
reforms opened up the British economy in more than just the intended sense. They
created a perfect freebooting environment for tax avoidance at a level to dwarf
anything seen thus far.


So it was that by the early 2000s, an era littered with corporate scandals from
Enron in the US to Equitable Life in Britain, outwardly respectable companies
and their professional advisers had been propelled into the kind of scheming
last seen by the tax inspectors who raided Rossminster’s offices over twenty
years before. Neo-liberal ideology and a couple of extra noughts on the end of
deals had seen off any lingering scruples.


But the big money at stake meant that tax avoidance was now practised not by a
couple of maverick accountants who were rubbing the authorities up the wrong way
but by firms who were hand in glove with the government.


Just as with corporate taxation in the 1990s, employment tax laws had been put
at the service of free market capitalism.


By the late 1990s a rash of tax avoidance schemes had broken out, as billions of
pounds’ worth of bonuses were channelled into shares in offshore companies and
trusts.


In short, the banker would get his cash without paying full tax and national
insurance on it, while the company would get its share scheme tax break when it
had in fact paid instant bonuses never intended to be eligible for a tax
concession.


By 2010 a multinational company that was avoiding tax on a breathtaking scale
could sidestep the law, write its own tax bill and simultaneously shape the
rules that will govern its tax avoidance in future.


A study from Oxford University, he noticed, described how most companies
‘believed that corporation tax issues seem to be too complex or obscure for the
media and the public to understand. Accordingly, the issues are not covered in
the media or they go unnoticed by the public.’


What a team of reporters eventually found was a corporate Britain that was doing
more than just diverting its financing offshore for the tax breaks. It was
tearing itself apart in pursuit of tax avoidance.


‘Tax-efficient supply chain management’ – as it has become known in one of those
obfuscatory tax euphemisms – offers huge scope for tax dodging as established
and newer tax havens bend over backwards to host the management, intellectual
property, financing and other facets of a business that can be commoditized,
moved and priced.


Strip away the jargon and this is corporate tax dodging on a global scale,
increasingly sanctioned by the world’s tax authorities.


The effect of tax-efficient supply chain management on UK tax payments hit the
headlines in 2012 when Reuters analysed a series of US companies’ contributions
and found that Starbucks had paid just £8.3m tax on several billions of pounds’
worth of sales since 1998 and nothing for several years. At the same time it had
been telling investors – as anybody strolling along a high street would agree –
that its British operations were prospering.


The recent takeover of another British company with honourable origins,
Quaker-founded Cadbury, by US food company Kraft, had devastating consequences
for the company’s UK tax payments, not to mention the jobs of some its British
employees. What’s more, the process demonstrated how the UK’s generous tax
breaks for interest payments act as a public subsidy to foreign takeovers that
can distort Britain’s industrial base.


The most successful of them is the Australian-born, British-based ‘arbitrage’
specialist behind Caymans-based hedge fund CQS, Michael Hintze, who has given
£1.25m to the Tories.


A similar set-up is found at the hedge fund chaired by current Tory treasurer
and multimillion-pound donor Stanley Fink, International Standard Asset
Management, which boasts ‘offices in London and New York’


Football is one more business that has been distorted by tax avoidance. But at
least the Premier League now has a fitting sponsor: Barclays.
[\*](#ASIN:B00BEUR7OW;LOC:2393)


As with football players, the competitive advantage for non-doms in the hedge
fund business is overwhelming. By 2008 one senior hedge fund lawyer estimated
that half of London’s hedge funds were run by non-domiciled individuals, several
hundred times the proportion of the UK population claiming non-domicile status.


Non-domicile tax status works so well for the international jet set by turning
UK tax residence, which might be thought a fiscal handicap, into a major asset.
Under the UK’s network of international tax agreements, residence here
automatically converts an individual into a non-resident back home and thus no
longer taxable there. The UK then privileges its new resident with non-dom
status and thus tax exemption for income that he manages to keep offshore (but
with plenty of wrinkles to allow it back in if, for example, he wants to snaffle
up some prime UK property). The non-domicile tax break thus becomes not just a
UK tax avoidance tool but a global one.


This is a business that has played a major part in inflating international
finance to a level that dwarfs productive industry, creating the conditions for
the 2008 financial crisis.


‘Any commonsense person would say that a highly paid private equity executive
paying less tax than a cleaning lady or other low-paid workers can’t be right,’
admitted chairman of the SVG private equity group, Nicholas Ferguson, in June
2007.


When Cadbury was taken over by US food giant Kraft in 2010, shutting down a
factory despite promises not to do so, business secretary Vince Cable promised
to rein in overseas takeovers that erode the British industrial base (although
nothing would come of that commitment). The non-dom tax break in the hands of
private equity is in fact a far greater source of the influence he feared. It
acts as a kind of reverse protectionism in which overseas control is favoured
over home control and can only militate against a sustainable domestic economy.


Tax relief for millionaires using tax havens was, however, exactly what Gordon
Brown permitted and extended over thirteen years at nos 10 and 11 Downing
Street. His imperviousness to his own previous convictions was, for some reason,
strongly correlated to the generosity of a group of non-dom Labour Party donors,
including Ronald Cohen and industrialists Lakshmi Mittal and Lord Paul, who had
rallied to the New Labour cause. Between 2001 – when party donations were first
published – and 2010, the non-doms donated around £10m, more than the cost of a
typical general election campaign.


In 2006 accountants Grant Thornton estimated that in the previous year Britain’s
fifty-four billionaires, mostly non-doms, paid tax of £15m on combined fortunes
of £126bn.


Non-dom businessmen, footballers, bankers, hedge fund managers and entrepreneurs
all have a competitive advantage over their home-grown rivals. Highly geared
private equity-owned businesses generating high but risky returns for their
owners and less security for their employees can exploit the non-dom advantage
to gain an edge over more traditionally owned companies.


As one tax commentator put it, ‘We might as well go the whole hog and apply to
become the 27th Canton of Switzerland.’


The war on tax avoidance had already been slipping through the Inland Revenue’s
fingers since the early 1990s, as Conservative governments all but froze the
recruitment of tax inspectors and left the department hopelessly outgunned.


Just as Northern Rock could gear up its perpetual mortgage machine undisturbed
by irksome regulators, so multinational companies must be allowed to structure
their tax affairs without too much hassle from prying tax inspectors.


As one former tax inspector told me: ‘HMRC began to change from impartial
policeman of the tax regime enacted by parliament, smoothing its rough edges in
exceptional cases through negotiation and compromise, into a self-appointed
adjudicator, policing the law only to the extent that it did not interfere with
the global ambitions of multinational enterprises.’


The multinationals that had captured the CBI – which should have spoken for
business big and small but on tax at least was the mouthpiece of its larger
members – wanted more than just a friendly tax administration, welcome though
that was. They demanded nothing less than a rewrite of corporate tax law
governing multinational businesses.


By the spring 2009 budget a crucial pillar of Britain’s international tax rules
had been knocked down.


Right at the top, the Revenue began to see taxation issues affecting large
companies in the way that the tax avoidance industry did, not in the way that
tax inspectors seeking to apply the law might be expected to. What started out a
decade before as an attempt to tax big business through ‘a relationship of
mutual trust’ became one that involved, in the words of the Varney review,
‘taking the business perspective into consideration in … implementing policy
decisions’ and then strayed alarmingly into applying tax laws as companies
wanted them applied, not as parliament had decided they should be.


\*\*\*


It doesn’t take a degree in constitutional theory to appreciate that parliament
makes laws and the executive arms of government, such as HM Revenue and Customs,
implement them. But this centuries-old principle came under severe strain
towards the end of the twenty-first century’s first decade through the corporate
capture of the tax authorities.


By 2011, HMRC never tired of pointing out, the six-year-old ‘high-risk
corporates’ programme had raised over £9bn from settling tax disputes.18 It gave
the impression of an aggressive tax authority bearing down on tax avoidance. But
it was a charade.


Vodafone’s deal, for example, would count as a £1.25bn success, the billions
relinquished simply ignored.


Without impressive leaks, nobody would even have known that Barclays was
avoiding tax on an economy-shifting scale.


The broom that should have been cleaning up large-scale corporate tax avoidance
was sweeping it under the carpet instead.


At the same time, designing financing schemes to funnel interest into tax havens
and ‘tax-efficient supply chain management’ – i.e. transfer pricing schemes –
for the biggest companies to siphon profits out of the UK into lower tax areas
remain among the major accountancy firms most profitable lines of tax work.


Even when large businesses do face a tax inspector across a desk, they encounter
nothing like the suspicion faced by smaller ones, their conduct considered all
but beyond reproach. By 2010 penalties for fraudulent or negligent
understatements of income charged on all 770 companies dealt with by the
Revenue’s Large Business Service had dropped to £0.4m, or around 0.01% of the
tax they had under-declared on their tax returns.27 This was around 200 times
lower than the rate applying to other businesses.


By 2011 not a single corporation tax avoidance scheme unearthed by the 2004
disclosure rules – of which there were hundreds, at least – had been taken by
the Revenue even to the first tax tribunal.


The government and the country’s most senior tax inspector had become salesmen,
and what they were selling was Britain’s tax system.


The legislation in question would effect the comprehensive relaxation of the
taxation of British multinationals’ overseas profits under the ‘controlled
foreign companies’ laws that George Osborne had announced in the previous day’s
budget. [\*](#ASIN:B00BEUR7OW;LOC:2987)


Not only did Osborne accelerate corporation tax cuts to the lowest rate of any
major Western economy – 23% by 2014 (since cut to 21%) – he also took an axe to
the offshore anti-tax avoidance ‘controlled foreign companies’ laws and
announced a tax emption for companies’ tax haven branches. The package would
slash the largest companies’ tax bills by around £7bn over four years, the
Treasury estimated.


It would now be straightforward for a company to fund its overseas operations by
borrowing in the UK, generating tax-deductible interest expenses to reduce its
taxable profits here, while ensuring that the profits from using this money
aren’t taxed here – or anywhere else for that matter.
[\*](#ASIN:B00BEUR7OW;LOC:3019)


One well-informed tax specialist blogged, under the heading ‘Corporate tax
reform and the death of UK corporation tax for large multinationals’, that the
changes ‘will likely lead to most large multinationals paying significantly
reduced or no UK corporate tax’. It is a prophecy of doom – or joy for the
tax-dodgers – that is shared by Britain’s leading tax advisers.


The trashing of the corporate tax system was a stunning and artfully executed
victory for big business and its champions in the Treasury in the face of what,
before the 2010 general election, was already growing public disquiet over tax
avoidance.


Chancellor Osborne and his junior minister David Gauke could ease the offshore
tax rules to the point that Britain would become a corporate tax haven where
contrived avoidance schemes aren’t needed anyway.


And when it came to piloting their new rules through parliament in the 2011 and
2012 Finance Bills, there was never going to be any meaningful scrutiny as the
Labour opposition team were briefed (free of charge) by PricewaterhouseCoopers –
the accountancy firm probably standing to gain most from advising on the
offshore opportunities opened up.


The implications go beyond immediate tax loss. Tax breaks available only to the
largest multinationals hamper the competiveness of smaller ones that can’t cut
their tax bills with an offshore finance company or by shifting their brand
names into a tax haven. What’s more, tax concessions for diverting profits into
tax havens will take jobs out of the country.


The companies that George Osborne now wants to call Britain home will come not
to do real productive business employing real people, although they may create
some work for the accountants and tax lawyers needed to exploit the new rules.


By 2012, the richest multinational corporations had put themselves beyond what
was officially considered tax avoidance. Writing their own laws, they had
created the offshore opportunities to reduce their tax bills way below headline
rates, but now with a parliamentary seal of approval. And if parliament
approves, on the official definition it can’t be tax avoidance.


Big business, tax avoidance advisers, and the government they had captured had
got what they wanted: Britain, the premier twenty-first-century tax haven for
the world’s multinationals.


In the same August 2011 week that Prime Minister David Cameron promised
Britain’s rioting feral underclass ‘we will track you down, we will find you and
we will punish you’ and magistrates jailed a youth for stealing £3 worth of
water, it was with a special kind of upper-class insensitivity that the Prime
Minister’s fellow Bullingdonian George Osborne granted immunity from prosecution
to the feral financial classes who were looting the economy of billions.


The British government remains content to feed the PFI industry contracts that
will cost public service budgets over £250bn on the understanding that it would
make a commensurate tax contribution. When it was shown that this simply doesn’t
happen, the government looked the other way. It accepted public services as tax
avoidance schemes.


British state was fiscally eating itself. [\*](#ASIN:B00BEUR7OW;LOC:3525)


The looting of developing countries by corrupt elites has long captured the
headlines. The more subtle and generally legal tax avoidance methods deployed by
some of the biggest corporate players in these economies, by contrast, went
largely overlooked until recent efforts by campaigners led by the Tax Justice
Network and Christian Aid brought the issue right up the political agenda.


When the charity ActionAid and I teamed up to take a closer look at one of
Britain’s largest operators in the developing world, SABMiller, we discovered
the shocking reality of tax avoidance there.


Piecing together a multinational’s faraway tax affairs is not, however, a
straightforward matter, so we focused on the group’s operations in just one
country, Ghana, where per capita daily income is less than £3.


SABMiller has bought into all the standard tax-planning techniques.


Once it had paid its finance costs, Accra Breweries was left with a £3m loss. In
three of the four years it thus paid no corporate income tax, and in the other
sent a cheque to the Ghanaian government for just £0.2m.


The pattern appeared to be repeated for SABMiller’s operations elsewhere in the
developing world:


The result is a serious dent in developing countries’ revenues and their efforts
to move out of aid dependency. Ghana takes 22% of its gross domestic product in
taxation, far more than its neighbours but still a long way behind the 40%
typically raised in the rich world when its citizens need public services every
bit as much.


While it is impossible to quantify the economic benefits that eradicating tax
avoidance would have, if SABMiller is anything to go by it would be very
significant.


Like many others, Shell was happy to fill my inbox with claims of corporate
social responsibility, but not hard facts and figures about tax arrangements.
And I couldn’t help feeling that, by paying no corporate tax but doing some good
deeds, the world’s second biggest company was saying politely but firmly: ‘We’ll
decide how we contribute to the societies we operate in, thank you very much,
not their elected governments.


The industry in restructuring major conglomerates in order to slash tax bills –
which grew rapidly in the rich world in the 1990s – has now reached developing
countries that have far weaker defences against the onslaught.
[\*](#ASIN:B00BEUR7OW;LOC:3623)


Tax planning, in other words, sends economic control over one of Ghana’s more
important local businesses out of the country and into one at least fifteen
times wealthier.


This trend would be serious enough without the encouragement of the British
government. But the changes to laws governing the tax haven subsidiary companies
of British multinationals, outlined in chapter 7, will make the avoidance of tax
in developing countries far easier.


One partner from PwC summed up the tax industry’s reaction: ‘The ability to
finance overseas operations in a tax efficient way that is mandated by
government is a very welcome change.’


It will be left to under-resourced and inexpert tax authorities in developing
countries to mount any kind of challenge to the schemes, and it’s obvious who
will win that battle.


British taxation policy really had been so comprehensively captured by the
world’s biggest corporations that screw-the-poor policies like these could be
written into the statute book at their whim, without a pang of conscience being
felt anywhere in Whitehall.


With some straightforward offshore planning the biggest multinationals can now
take their tax rates way below any headline rate the government announces. The
club’s members have rewritten the rulebook so that they will no longer need tax
avoidance as the government chooses to define it. They can shave billions of
pounds off their tax bill without finding a loophole or even getting a cosy
deal. They just follow the very laws they themselves drafted.


The capture of tax administration by the tax avoidance industry has been
exposed, too. But it certainly hasn’t been remedied. Too much tax law remains at
the service of tax avoidance. If the British tax system is ever to be fair, if
we really are all to be in it together, the scandals of recent years must
translate into radical action.


A commitment from George Osborne in the wake of the Starbucks scandal to work
within the OECD to ‘strengthen international standards’ appears likely to fall
woefully short of this.


Britain could isolate and if necessary close down the tax havens within its
direct sphere of influence and through domestic tax law make it far harder to
get money into other recalcitrant tax havens in the first place.


One specific and immediate measure against offshore tax evasion should be to
tear up the British tax agreement with Switzerland that enshrines tax haven
secrecy and decriminalizes offshore tax fraud.


Over the last few years the British government has ripped the guts out of laws
that protect the country’s corporate tax base. It has adopted a ‘worst of all
worlds’ system that exempts British multinationals’ foreign profits but allows
tax relief for the costs of funding them. In doing so it has turned Britain into
a corporate tax haven, inviting multinationals to shelter income offshore and
encouraging them to place real business overseas. These developments need to be
reversed at the first opportunity in order to restore some integrity to the UK
corporate tax system.


Tax avoidance needs to become a two-way bet in which the avoider can lose as
well as gain. Most carefully planned schemes involve neither the fraud nor
negligence required to trigger penalties (and where they do the authorities
generally turn a blind eye), so tax avoidance goes unpenalized and there is no
deterrent to avoiding tax.


When it comes to tax administration, there are two crucial tasks. One is to
disengage the corporate elite and HMRC’s upper echelons from
[\*](#ASIN:B00BEUR7OW;LOC:4081) the warm embrace in which they have been locked
for too long.


The second task is to reverse the jobs cull of recent years. In April 2005 HMRC
employed 105,000 people; five years later this was 68,000 – a fall of 35% with
more cuts to come. The budget for chasing up tax avoidance and evasion has
almost halved, from £3.6bn to £1.9bn, in five years.
[\*](#ASIN:B00BEUR7OW;LOC:4088)


Yet this is among the most economically productive activity in the country. With
qualified tax inspectors recovering many times their costs (the multiple for
someone dealing with the biggest cases running into three figures), a major
recruitment and training drive would pay for itself several times over in the
short run.


Taxation needs to be reclaimed from the vested interests by public and
parliament. That MPs were unable to scrutinize major tax avoidance scandals
involving Vodafone and Goldman Sachs was itself scandalous.


Tax belongs to us and, although it is often complicated, we have to get to grips
with it. Campaigners need to educate themselves and take on those who would
abuse the system and remain unaccountable. Non-governmental organizations need
to step up their impressive work to date, acquiring more expertise with which to
confront tax avoidance.

[amzn:B00BEUR7OW]

