The Great Divide
================

By **Joseph Stiglitz**

![](/bookimg/thegreatdivide.jpg)

This book is mostly about the economics of inequality. But as I have just
suggested, one cannot neatly separate out  politics and economics.

I describe the nexus between politics and economics: the vicious circle by which
more economic inequality gets  translated into political inequality, especially
in America’s political system, which gives such unbridled power to  money.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:200)

During the past decade, four of the central issues facing our society have been
the great divide—the huge inequality  that is emerging in the United States and
many other advanced countries—economic mismanagement, globalization, and  the
role of the state and the market.

But while politics has been part of the cause of our current troubles, it will
only be through politics that we will  find solutions: the market by itself
won’t do it. Unfettered markets will lead to more monopoly power, more abuses
of the financial sector, more unbalanced trade relations. It will only be
through reform of our democracy—making our  government more accountable to all
of the people, more reflective of their interests—that we will be able to heal
the great divide and restore the country to shared prosperity.

This is a theme I return to frequently in this book. Inequality weakens
aggregate demand and the economy.

The articles included in this first section describe the policies that laid the
groundwork for the Great Recession:  What did we do wrong? Who is to blame?
While those in the financial market, at the Fed, and at Treasury would like  to
pretend it was just something that happened—an unpreventable,
once-in-a-hundred-years flood—I believed then, and  believe even more strongly
now, that the crisis was man-made. It was something that the 1 percent (indeed,
a sliver  of that 1 percent) did to the rest of us.

It is policies and politics that matter. The United States could have responded
to the weakened economy by investing  in America, or by undertaking policies
that reduce inequality. Both of these would have led to a stronger economy  and
a fairer society. But economic inequality inevitably leads to political
inequality.

Rather than regulations that would stabilize the economy and protect ordinary
citizens, we got deregulation that led  to instability and left Americans prey
to the bankers.

Proponents of a strong financial sector were right about one thing: it is hard
to have a well-performing economy  without a well-performing financial sector.
But, as we have seen repeatedly, the financial sector doesn’t perform  well on
its own; it requires strong regulations, effectively enforced, both to prevent
it from imposing harm on the  rest of the society and to make sure that it
actually performs the functions it is supposed to perform.

Even though the crisis had long been in the making, and even though there had
been ample warnings, those in charge,  both at the Fed and in the
administration, seemed surprised, and I believe genuinely were—a remarkable
testament to  the ability to close one’s senses to information that one finds
unpleasant and contradicts one’s preconceptions.

Virtually any economist who did not blindly believe in the virtues of the free
and unregulated markets, their  efficiency and stability, saw the writing on the
wall.

The precipitating event that plunged the country from the recession into a deep
recession, the worst since the Great  Depression, was the collapse of Lehman
Brothers on September 15, 2008.

After confidently asserting that letting it collapse would have only a limited
effect on the economy, the Fed and  Treasury took a 180-degree turn and bailed
out AIG, the most expensive bailout in human history, an amount of  corporate
welfare to one firm that exceeded that given to the millions of poor Americans
over years and years. Later  we were to learn why—and why they did everything
they could to hide what they were doing from the American people:  the money
passed quickly from AIG to Goldman Sachs and other banks.

The Obama administration may claim that it stopped the economy from falling into
another Great Depression.

The recovery was designed by the 1 percent, for the 1 percent. Trillions have
been unnecessarily lost by following  the 1 percent’s agenda.

Doing so redistributed money from ordinary citizens to the wealthy bankers. Had
the banks been charged what they  should have been, our national debt would be
lower and we would have more money to invest in education, technology,
infrastructure—investments that would have led to a stronger economy with more
shared prosperity.

When there is a crisis, it is always ordinary citizens who bear the
brunt—workers who lose their jobs, homeowners who  lose their homes, ordinary
citizens who see their retirement accounts vanish, who are unable to send their
children  to college, and who cannot live out their dreams. Small businesses go
into bankruptcy in droves.

By contrast, big businesses not only survive; some even prosper as wages are
forced down and they maintain sales  abroad. The bankers who caused the crisis
also manage to do quite well, thank you.

The need for regulation should have been particularly clear because the banks
and others in the financial sector have  a long-established proclivity for
exploitation.

When banks focus on exploitation, they increase inequality; when they focus on
job creation, they promote equality,  both by reducing unemployment and by
leading to higher wages, which naturally follow from lowered unemployment.
Thus, bank regulations that restrict their bad behavior can help doubly: they
inhibit their ability to exploit, and  encourage them to do what they should be
doing—simply by reducing the profits to be made in alternative ways.

Even as growth is restored, it will be years and years, if ever, before the
damage of the Great Recession is  repaired,before incomes are back to where they
would have been without the crisis. Indeed, the damage appears to be
long-lasting.

Looked at another way, Bush’s own fiscal irresponsibility fostered
irresponsibility in everyone else. Credit was  shoveled out the door, and
subprime mortgages were made available to anyone this side of life support.

U.S. aid to all of Africa has been hovering around $5 billion a year, the
equivalent of less than two weeks of direct  Iraq-war expenditures. The
president made a big deal out of the financial problems facing Social Security,
but the  system could have been repaired for a century with what we have bled
into the sands of Iraq.

In retrospect, the only big winners from the war have been the oil companies,
the defense contractors, and  al-Qaeda.

President Bush worked to undermine multilateralism—the notion that countries
around the world need to cooperate—and  to replace it with an America-dominated
system. In the end, he failed to impose American dominance—but did succeed  in
weakening cooperation.

What is required is in some ways simple to describe: it amounts to ceasing our
current behavior and doing exactly the  opposite. It means not spending money
that we don’t have, increasing taxes on the rich, reducing corporate welfare,
strengthening the safety net for the less well off, and making greater
investment in education, technology, and  infrastructure.

The truth is most of the individual mistakes boil down to just one: a belief
that markets are self-adjusting and that  the role of government should be
minimal. Looking back at that belief during hearings this fall on Capitol Hill,
Alan Greenspan said out loud, “I have found a flaw.” Congressman Henry Waxman
pushed him, responding, “In other  words, you found that your view of the world,
your ideology, was not right; it wasn’t working.” “Absolutely,  precisely,”
Greenspan said. The embrace by America—and much of the rest of the world—of this
flawed economic  philosophy made it inevitable that we would eventually arrive
at the place we are today.

There is one more important culprit, which, in fact, has played a key
behind-the-scenes role in many various parts of  this story: America’s political
system, and especially its dependence on campaign contributions. This allowed
Wall  Street to exercise the enormous influence that it has had, to push for the
stripping of regulations and to the  appointment of regulators who didn’t
believe in regulations—with the predictable and predicted consequences that we
have seen.

There are those who now would like to reconstruct the system as it was prior to
2008. They will push for regulatory  reform, but it will be more cosmetic than
real.

Little will be done about incentive structures or even risky practices. If so,
then, another crisis is sure to  follow.

Capitalism may be the best economic system that man has come up with, but no one
ever said it would create stability.  In fact, over the past 30 years, market
economies have faced more than 100 crises. That is why I and many other
economists believe that government regulation and oversight are an essential
part of a functioning market  economy.

The market on its own is not enough. Government must play a role.

Democracy, we now know, is more than periodic elections: in some countries, such
elections have been used to  legitimize essentially authoritarian regimes and
deprive large parts of the citizenry of basic rights.

Perhaps the most important aspect of inequality is inequality of political
rights.

Some countries try to make it easy for the working poor to vote, by having
elections on Sunday. Other countries (like  Australia) have actively sought to
make sure that the voices of all citizens are heard with of mandatory
voting—charging a penalty on everyone who does not show up at the voting booth.

Voice is even more important: the ability to influence the political process,
either by affecting voting patterns or,  more directly, by affecting the actions
of key decision makers. If the rich can use their money to control the press  or
to influence (a gentler, but perhaps less accurate word than “buy”) politicians,
then their voice will be heard  far more loudly.

It is a corruption that occurs not via cash-stuffed envelopes handed to
politicians, but via an equally invidious  process, using campaign contributions
to buy “policies” that bring riches to a few.

Economic inequality is not just or even so much the result of inexorable laws of
economics, as it is of our policies  and politics. It is, in this sense, a
matter of choice. But here we have a vicious circle, as economic inequality
leads to and reinforces political inequality, which simply reinforces our
economic inequality.

We know what to do to achieve a more egalitarian society. Inequality is a matter
not so much of capitalism in the  20th century as of democracy in the 20th
century. The worry is that our ersatz capitalism—socializing losses while  we
privatize gains—and our imperfect democracy—closer to a system of one dollar one
vote than to one person one  vote—will interact to produce disappointment in
both the economic and the political spheres.

Those who have contributed great positive innovations to our society, from the
pioneers of genetic understanding to  the pioneers of the Information Age, have
received a pittance compared with those responsible for the financial
innovations that brought our global economy to the brink of ruin.

The more divided a society becomes in terms of wealth, the more reluctant the
wealthy become to spend money on common  needs. The rich don’t need to rely on
government for parks or education or medical care or personal security—they  can
buy all these things for themselves. In the process, they become more distant
from ordinary people, losing  whatever empathy they may once have had.

In a broad sense, “rent seeking” defines many of the ways by which our current
political process helps the rich at  the expense of everyone else, including
transfers and subsidies from the government, laws that make the marketplace
less competitive, laws that allow CEOs to take a disproportionate share of
corporate revenue and laws that permit  corporations to make profits as they
degrade the environment. The magnitude of rent seeking in our economy, while
hard to quantify, is clearly enormous.

The financial industry, which now largely functions as a market in speculation
rather than a tool for promoting true  economic productivity, is the
rent-seeking sector par excellence. Rent seeking goes beyond speculation. The
financial sector also gets rents out of its domination of the means of
payment—the exorbitant credit and debit card  fees and also the less well-known
fees charged to merchants and passed on, eventually, to consumers.

In recent years, the financial sector has accounted some 40 percent of all
corporate profits. This does not mean that  its social contribution sneaks into
the plus column, or comes even close.

Much of the inequality in our economy has been the result of rent seeking,
because, to a significant degree, rent  seeking redistributes money from those
at the bottom to those at the top.

Many, if not most, Americans possess a limited understanding of the nature of
the inequality in our society. They  know that something has gone wrong, but
they underestimate the harm that inequality does even as they overestimate  the
cost of taking action. These mistaken beliefs, which have been reinforced by
ideological rhetoric, are having a  catastrophic effect on politics and economic
policy.

Franklin D. Roosevelt, a purebred patrician, understood that the only way to
save an essentially capitalist America  was not only to spread the wealth,
through taxation and social programs, but to put restraints on capitalism
itself,  through regulation. Roosevelt and the economist John Maynard Keynes,
while reviled by the capitalists, succeeded in  saving capitalism from the
capitalists.

he children of the poor can afford neither the advanced degrees that are
increasingly required for employment nor the  unpaid internships that provide
the alternative route to “good” jobs.

“Loopholes” does not adequately describe the flaws in our tax system; “gaps”
might be better. Closing them might end  the specter of the very rich almost
proudly disclosing that they pay a tax rate on their disclosed income at half
the rate of those with less income, and that they keep their money in tax havens
like the Cayman Islands.

Two basic principles of taxation are that it is better to tax bad things than
good; and it is better to tax factors  in what economists call “inelastic
supply”—meaning that the amounts produced and sold won’t change when taxes are
imposed on them. Thus, if we taxed pollution in all of its forms—including
carbon emissions— we could raise hundreds  of billions of dollars every year,
and have a better environment.

Similarly, appropriately designed taxes on the financial sector would not only
raise considerable amounts of money  but also discourage banks from imposing
costs on others— as when they polluted the global economy with toxic  mortgages.

If we required the banks to pay but a fraction of the costs they have imposed on
others, we would then have further  funds to undo some of the damage that they
caused by their discriminatory and predatory lending practices, which  moved
money from the bottom of the economic pyramid to the top.

Similarly, by taxing land, oil, and minerals more, and forcing those who extract
resources from public land to pay  the full values of these resources, which
rightly belong to all the people, we could then spend those proceeds for  public
investments—for instance, in education, technology, and infrastructure—without
resulting in less land, less  oil, fewer minerals.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:1890)

On both sides of the Atlantic, the austerity fanatics say, march on: these are
the bitter pills that we need to take  to achieve prosperity. But prosperity for
whom?

Excessive financialization—which helps explain Britain’s dubious status as the
second-most-unequal country, after the  United States, among the world’s most
advanced economies—also helps explain the soaring inequality.

Inequality and poverty among children are a special moral disgrace. They flout
right-wing suggestions that poverty is  a result of laziness and poor choices;
children can’t choose their parents.

see us entering a world divided not just between the haves and have-nots, but
also between those countries that do  nothing about it, and those that do.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:2005)

The problem may not be with how markets should work, but with our political
system, which has failed to ensure that  markets are competitive, and has
designed rules that sustain distorted markets in which corporations and the rich
can (and unfortunately do) exploit everyone else.

The main question confronting us today is not really about capitalism in the
21st century. It is about democracy in  the 21st century.

This is less about economics than it is about politics. We don’t have to choose
between capitalism and fairness. We  must choose both.

Today, inequality is growing dramatically again, and the past three decades or
so have proved conclusively that one  of the major culprits is trickle-down
economics—the idea that the government can just step back and if the rich get
richer and use their talents and resources to create jobs, everyone will
benefit. It just doesn’t work; the  historical data now prove that.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:2255)

If those who are in charge of making the critical decisions are so “cognitively
captured” by the 1 percent, by the  bankers, that they see that the only
alternative is to give those who caused the crisis hundreds of billions of
dollars while leaving workers and homeowners in the lurch, the system is unfair.

None of this is the outcome of inexorable economic forces, either; it’s the
result of policies and politics—what we  did and didn’t do.

And if these policies continue, these conditions will grow even worse.

Everyone recognizes that education is the only way up, but as a college degree
becomes increasingly essential to  making one’s way in a 21st-century economy,
education for those not to the manner born is increasingly  unaffordable.

Of the harm that inequality inflicts on our economies, politics, and societies,
the damage done to children demands  special concern. Whatever responsibility
poor adults may bear for their lot in life— they may not have worked hard
enough, saved enough, or made good decisions—children’s circumstances are thrust
upon them without any sort of  choice. Children, perhaps more than anyone else,
need the protection that rights afford.

There has always been inequality. There always will be. The question posed by
these articles is why inequality—in  virtually all of its dimensions—has
increased so much in the last 35 years. [\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:2745)

Financialization—the increased importance of the financial sector in the
economy—has been central, not only in the  increased instability of the economy,
evidenced by the Great Recession, but in the increased inequality.

Inequalities of opportunity are both cause and consequence of inequalities in
incomes.

Every law and regulation, every government expenditure, every policy, can have
an effect on inequality.

We need to break up the too-big-to-fail banks; there is no evidence that these
behemoths deliver societal benefits  that are commensurate with the costs they
have imposed on others. And, if we don’t break them up, then we have to
severely limit what they do. They can’t be allowed to do what they did in the
past—gamble at others’ expenses.

Their lobbying efforts worked well, first to deregulate, and then to have
taxpayers pay for the cleanup. Their hope  is that it will work once again to
keep them free to do as they please, regardless of the risks for taxpayers and
the economy. We cannot afford to let that happen.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:2856)

No one enjoys paying taxes, and yet all but the extreme libertarians agree, that
taxes are the price we pay for  civilized society. But in recent decades, the
burden for paying that price has been distributed in increasingly  unfair ways.

Economists—even at traditional, conservative international institutions like the
International Monetary Fund—have  come to realize that excessive inequality is
bad for growth and stability. The tax system can play an important role  in
moderating the degree of inequality. Ours, however, does remarkably little about
it.

We could have a tax system that encourages good things like hard work and thrift
and discourages bad things, like  rent seeking, gambling, financial speculation,
and pollution.

It is time the international community faced the reality: we have an
unmanageable, unfair, distortionary global tax  regime. It is a tax system that
is pivotal in creating the increasing inequality that marks most advanced
countries  today—with America standing out in the forefront and the UK not far
behind.

We do not measure trust in our national income accounts, but investments in
trust are no less important than those in  human capital or machines.
Unfortunately, however, trust is becoming yet another casualty of our country’s
staggering inequality:

When 1 percent of the population takes home more than 22 percent of the
country’s income—and 95 percent of the  increase in income in the post-crisis
recovery—some pretty basic things are at stake. Reasonable people, even those
ignorant of the maze of unfair policies that created this reality, can look at
this absurd distribution and be  pretty certain that the game is rigged.

It’s hard to know just how far we’ve gone down the path toward complete trust
disintegration, but the evidence is not  encouraging.

As always, it is the poor and the unconnected who suffer most from this, and who
are the most repeatedly  deceived.

A central message of this book is that inequality is affected by virtually every
policy that the government  undertakes.

Trade agreements have always been sold on the grounds that they create jobs—and
if that were true, workers should be  among the loudest champions of these
agreements. [\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:3348)

Dishonesty is never the best policy, and the dishonest selling of trade
agreements stands as a low point in public  policy.

nequality prolongs the downturn, and the downturn exacerbates inequality.
Unfortunately, the austerity agenda  advocated by conservatives will make
matters worse on both counts.

If we go down the path of austerity,our country will increasingly become
divided, and we will pay a high economic  price for our growing inequality and
declining opportunity. The consequences will be even harder on our democracy,
our identity as a nation of opportunity and fair play, and our society.

Just look at what havoc this crisis wrought: median wealth fell by 40 percent,
those in the middle still have not  seen their incomes recover to precrisis
levels, and those in the upper 1 percent enjoyed all the fruits of the  recovery
(and then some). It is ordinary workers who have suffered most: they are the
ones who face high  unemployment, who see their wages cut, and who bear the
brunt of cutbacks in public services as a result of the  budget austerity.

‘Trade agreements’ new boosters euphemistically claim that they are simply after
regulatory harmonization, a  clean-sounding phrase that implies an innocent plan
to promote efficiency.

But when corporations call for harmonization, what they really mean is a race to
the bottom.

Corporations everywhere may well agree that getting rid of regulations would be
good for corporate profits. But there  would be some big losers—namely, the rest
of us.

In this series, I have repeatedly made two points: The first is that the high
level of inequality in the United  States today, and its enormous increase
during the past 30 years, is the cumulative result of an array of policies,
programs, and laws.

And this brings me to the second point that I have repeatedly emphasized:
Trickle-down economics is a myth.

What are being sold as “free-trade agreements” include IP provisions that could
stifle access to affordable  medicines, with a potentially significant impact on
economic growth and development.

Every country has a distinct political economy that shapes the extent and
effects of inequalities; each requires  separate assessment. The marked
differences in the extent and nature of inequality across countries demonstrate
that  inequality is not just determined by economic forces; it is shaped by
politics and policies.

Economists of widely differing philosophical outlooks agree that inequalities of
incomes and assets have harmful  economic effects.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:4012)

The more that wealth is allowed unrestricted roles in funding elections, the
more likely it is that economic  inequality will get translated into political
inequality.

One of the most pernicious forms of inequality relates to inequality of
opportunity, reflected in a lack of  socioeconomic mobility, condemning those
born into the bottom of the economic pyramid to almost surely remain  there.

There are many dimentions to inequality - some with more invidious effects than
others—and many ways to measure these  inequalities. One thing is certain,
however: sustainable development cannot be achieved while ignoring extreme
disparities.

An economic and political system that does not deliver for most citizens is one
that is not sustainable in the long  run. Eventually, faith in democracy and the
market economy will erode, and the legitimacy of existing institutions  and
arrangements will be called into question.

Our divisions are deep. Economic and geographic segregation have immunized those
at the top from the problems of  those down below.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:4269)

Our economy, our democracy, and our society have paid for these gross
inequities. The true test of an economy is not  how much wealth its princes can
accumulate in tax havens, but how well off the typical citizen is.

Money that was meant to have trickled down has instead evaporated in the balmy
climate of the Cayman Islands.

We need not just a new war on poverty but a war to protect the middle class.
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:4294)

We must end the rent-seeking society we have gravitated toward, in which the
wealthy obtain profits by manipulating  the system. The problem of inequality is
not so much a matter of technical economics. It’s really a problem of  practical
politics.

Inequality is not just about the top marginal tax rate but also about our
children’s access to food and the right to  justice for all.

Widening and deepening inequality is not driven by immutable economic laws, but
by laws we have written  ourselves.

Thus the UK, which has followed the U.S. model most closely has, not
surprisingly, the highest level of inequality  among the advanced countries,
next to that of the United States. Countries pay a high price for this
inequality; at  stake is not just inequality of incomes but also inequality of
opportunity.

Democracy, we now recognize, involves more than periodic voting. Societies with
a high level of economic inequality  inevitably wind up with a high level of
political inequality: the elites run the political system for their own
interests, pursuing what economists call rent-seeking behavior, rather than the
general public interest. The result  is a most imperfect democracy.

Another world is possible; we need only the political will to pursue it.

If the UK continues on its current course, imitating the American model, it is
likely that the results will be like  those of the U.S.—where the typical family
has seen its income stagnate for a quarter-century, even as the rich get
richer.

No large economy—and Europe is a large economy—has ever emerged from a crisis at
the same time that it has imposed  austerity. Austerity always, inevitably, and
predictably makes matters worse.

Society’s most valuable asset, the talents of its people, is being wasted and
even destroyed.

The pain that Europe is experiencing, especially its poor and its young people,
is so unnecessary.

But austerity provides no promise of a better world anytime in the foreseeable
future.

And if the depression does continue, it is those at the bottom and in the middle
who will suffer the most

It is simply a matter of politics whether we choose to take the steps we need to
take to restore our economy to  prosperity.

Even were we able to ignore the economic imperative of fixing our inequality
problem, the damage it is doing to our  social fabric and political life should
prompt us to worry. Economic inequality leads to political inequality and a
broken decision-making process.

There are all kinds of excuses for inequality. Some say it’s beyond our control,
pointing to market forces like  globalization, trade liberalization, the
technological revolution, the “rise of the rest.” Others assert that doing
anything about it would make us all worse off, by stifling our already
sputtering economic engine. These are  self-serving, ignorant falsehoods. Market
forces don’t exist in a vacuum—we shape them.

Now we realize that we are paying a high price for our inequality and that
alleviating it and promoting growth are  intertwined, complementary goals. It
will be up to all of us—our leaders included—to muster the courage and
foresight to finally treat this beleaguering malady.

But anyone who believes that monetary policy is going to resuscitate the economy
will be sorely disappointed. That  idea is a distraction, and a dangerous one.

What we need to do instead is embark on a massive investment program—as
[\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:5519)  will increase our productivity for years to
come, and will also increase  employment now.

The only way it will happen is through a government stimulus designed not to
preserve the old economy but to focus  instead on creating a new one.

Growth is not just a matter of increasing GDP. It must be sustainable: growth
based on environmental degradation, a  debt-financed consumption binge, or the
exploitation of scarce natural resources, without reinvesting the proceeds,  is
not sustainable. [\*](#ASIN:B00YG34A12;LOC:5591)

Growth also must be inclusive; at least a majority of citizens must benefit.
Trickle-down economics does not work: an  increase in GDP can actually leave
most citizens worse off.

[amzn:B00YG34A12]

