The Leaderless Revolution (2011)
================================
Frustration with conventional politics is rising everywhere, depressing voter
turnout and fuelling popular anger. Politicians too can sense the mood, but are
unable to offer any prescription except more of the same politics, perhaps
spiced with a dangerous and hollow populism.


This new world requires something else beyond more promises, something beyond
new theories of interpretation, something that might, just might, make us feel
at last that the tools fit the job. This new world requires a new politics.


Recently, the UN Environment Program reported that even if states fulfilled all
of their commitments to reduce carbon emissions, including those made at
Copenhagen, the world’s temperature would still most likely exceed the 2°C
“danger” level. Outside of predictions and commitments, and in the real world of
the earth’s atmosphere, where success or failure is truly measured, the
concentration of carbon in the atmosphere has continued to rise unabated.


While globalisation intensifies apace, its rigours and stresses ever more
evident, its rewards seem to accrue mostly to a minority: the top one percent of
the population in the US takes home nearly twenty-five percent of all income,
the highest percentage since 1928.


In 2011, as leading bankers declared that the “years of apology” should be over,
one study showed that seven million of the poorest Britons had seen their living
standards decline by a massive ten percent over the previous decade.


In some parts of America, life expectancy is actually declining thanks to
poverty, though healthcare spending per capita – averaged across the population
– is higher here than anywhere on earth.


In India, politicians obsess about headline GDP growth rates, and the richest
build billion-dollar skyscraper houses, but hundreds of millions remain in
abject poverty and malnourishment – the calorie intake of the poorest has
remained stagnant for over a decade and more than half of India’s children under
five suffer stunting and poor brain development.


As billions join the global labour force, no job is secure; no industry is
stable; no profession may not one-day face destruction. While economic
insecurity is on the rise, so too is a more insidious and equally permanent
anxiety – political insecurity and violence.


Contrary to the received wisdom that economic underdevelopment is the fount of
terrorism, former CIA case officer Marc Sageman found in a study of 172 Al Qaeda
terrorists that the majority were middle- to upper-class, well-educated, married
with children, and occupied professional or semi-professional positions, often
as engineers, architects, scientists and doctors.


The Small Arms Survey now reckons that globally there are nearly 900 million
light weapons, some of ever-greater sophistication: sniper rifles deadly at two
miles’ range; man-portable missiles that can down airliners; mines that can sink
cruise liners.


As if these data were not dismal enough, it seems too that the very ground on
which we stand is less firm than before. Once conquered, mankind foolishly
believed nature would remain quiescent in our plans. Rising sea levels have
already required the evacuation – forever – of several low-lying islands. In
Australia and Russia, forest fires rage with a new and terrifying ferocity,
consuming whole towns. Even the sceptical notice greater volatility in the
weather – everything’s hotter and colder, and wetter and windier than it used to
be.


The urban majority now barely encounter what their forebears took for granted:
trees, fresh air, birdsong, silence. Lives are lived out in a frantic, noisy
hecticness; fulfilment is distant, with peace and escape dreamt of, sometimes
purchased, but all too rarely experienced.


The temptation is simply to switch off, tune out, escape.


The answer to both the personal and collective crises is in fact the same. And
it is simple. We lack control; we need to take it back.


The incredible and seismic changes of the late 20th and early 21st century have
forced dramatic and sometimes revolutionary changes in almost every realm of
human activity – finance, technology, culture – save one, politics.


Something else is desperately needed. That necessity has been articulated by
many, but none has offered a solution except more of the same,
politics-as-usual: futile calls for more “political will” to address this or
that problem, or celebrity-endorsed “single issue” campaigns for the public to
pressure their representatives to address one particular crisis over others.


People in government are not bad or stupid, on the contrary, but the contract
between people and government forces them to claim something which no sensible
person should claim, that government can understand and predict the massive
complexity of the contemporary world, and manage it on our behalf.


[sadly it required the death of a decent and honest man, my colleague David
Kelly, for me to see the light as to how far government would go to protect its
own false stories.]


The problem is always someone else’s, never ours, to solve.


In a world where government influence is in inexorable decline, and other
transnational forces assert themselves, some beneficent but some malign, there
is little choice but to take on the burden of action ourselves. If we do not,
others surely will, whether criminal mafias with worldwide reach, global
terrorist movements, or multinational companies with no concern but their own
profit.


It is comforting to believe that governments can provide for us, and protect us.
Governments want us to believe it; and we want to believe them. Unfortunately,
it is ever more evident that this comfortable pact between us rests upon weak
foundations indeed.


But in truth, the reason is that conventional representative democracy, where
the many elect the few, rests on a pact between voters and government: we vote,
they act; we get on with our lives, they protect. This is the pact in which the
parent must enrol their baby after birth. It endures until death. This pact is
rarely examined nor is it anywhere clearly or fully stated; it is rarely
admitted to, though its effects are profound.


The pact has several layers. At the most fundamental, the pact implies that
government will protect its citizens; it will provide for their security and
safety. In return, citizens agree to limit some of their freedom: they accept
the rule of law, and with it various restrictions on their behaviour.


Less familiar is the second layer of the pact, one that is less often mentioned
than the first, but one with more insidious effect. In addition to protecting
the population, government makes a further commitment – to take care of
society’s problems, including education, in some states healthcare services,
care for the elderly and disabled, to protect the natural environment, including
now the globe’s atmosphere, and above all, to provide for growth and employment
– to take care of the economy. This commitment – and its consequence – are
almost never explicitly stated: government will take care of these problems, so
we don’t have to.


For most of us, politics is a spectator sport – we observe, they do.


The trouble with the pact is that it is breaking down.


As a result, trust in politicians, never high, is declining.


The disintegration of the pact is exacerbated by a further damaging phenomenon:
the deepening chasm between voters and their representatives.


In every national democratic system, individual participation has been reduced
to mere occasional voting to choose legislators or the executive.


The competition to become one of the élite is intense and antagonistic, and in
some places violent.


In Britain, many politicians have spent their whole professional lives
practising nothing but politics, starting as researchers to MPs, then graduating
as MPs and sometimes government ministers. David Cameron, elected Britain’s
Prime Minister in 2010, has never had any job outside of politics, unless one
counts a brief stint working in public relations; the leader of the opposition,
Ed Miliband, likewise.


If this is the reality of the supposedly democratic legislative process, it is
unsurprising that popular enthusiasm for conventional politics is waning.
Membership of political parties, one measure of popular participation in
conventional politics, is in steep decline in all major western societies.


There is no clearer evidence of the separation of governors from voters than the
proliferation of the lobbying industry. And despite the promises of politicians
to limit this industry and its influence, it has continued to grow.


Professor Lawrence Lessig has argued that the mutual dependency of lobbyists and
legislators is now so profound, and corrupt, that legislation is enacted with
the sole purpose of extracting rents from corporate interests.


Private companies that run prisons now employ lobbyists to press for legislation
requiring judges to impose longer sentences.


In Britain, the corrosive influence of lobbyists is better concealed and less
acknowledged in a political class that prefers to sneer at the money politics
“across the pond” than examine its own squalid deficits.


After leaving office, Blair himself was awarded a position as “senior adviser”
to investment bank JPMorgan for a salary of half a million pounds a year63, a
rôle to which he gave rather less publicity than his position as a peace envoy
in the Middle East for the so-called “Quartet” group of countries.


One of the most senior British officials involved in the planning (if that’s the
right word) and execution of the 2003 invasion of Iraq was recruited upon
retirement by oil giant BP, which, it is no surprise to learn, has a
considerable interest in Iraq’s massive oil reserves; another, doubtless for the
same purpose, by British Gas.


As the popularity of membership of political parties declines, they are forced
to depend more and more on rich donors, whose inevitable demands for political
favour in return of course reinforces the disconnection between parties and
voters.


In Britain, data show all too clearly that the bulk of donations to the major
political parties came not from mass members but a much smaller number – just a
few hundred – of very large donors.


All the major political parties run, with little fanfare, secretive donor
circles where, for a certain fee, contributors are given guaranteed but discreet
access to ministers and other senior politicians with sway over policy.


Given the pernicious forces at work in the current political system, it is
unsurprising that the decisions produced are often grossly divorced from the
needs of electors, or even of the state itself.


In the UK, the government has been convinced by the defence industry to purchase
two enormous aircraft carriers, to “maintain Britain’s ability to project
force”, even though the carriers offer a far greater capability than Britain has
enjoyed for many decades, if not ever.


On another patch of the carpet, the oil giant BP revealed that it had “expressed
concern” to the British government about slow progress in diplomatic
negotiations between Libya and Britain on the transfer of prisoners, on the
grounds that it might negatively affect BP’s oil exploration contracts with the
Libyan government. These contracts were worth $900 million. The company claimed
that such an expression, and indeed its concern, was nothing to do with the
incarceration of the Lockerbie bomber, Abdelbaset al-Megrahi, whom Libya was
campaigning to have transferred to Libya from his Scottish prison, where he had
been sentenced to life imprisonment for the 1988 Lockerbie bombing, which killed
270 people.


Al-Megrahi was transferred, much to the outrage of many of the families of those
killed.


The political space is more and more occupied not by citizens, but by big
business and the wealthy.


In Britain, recent elections saw the first ever accession to a parliamentary
seat – in the European Parliament – of a far-right party, with the victory of
the British National Party.


The polarisation of political views, the intercession of business, lobbyists and
interest groups between voters and their representatives, the growing number and
power of political actors who are neither politicians nor conventional political
parties, accountable to no-one but themselves yet nonetheless wielding
considerable influence; together these factors suggest a deepening divide
between the public and their nominal representatives; they suggest nothing less
than a crisis in democracy.


The pact between citizen and government is never explicit. You can spend an
entire life paying taxes, obeying laws, without once being asked whether you
wish to contract into or out of it. Government insists upon your registration at
birth, and to be notified upon your death. At no point does it seek your
consent. You never get the chance to contract into the pact: your parents are
legally obliged to do so on your behalf whether they like it or not. And there
is only one way to contract out.


If government cannot provide for the stability, safety and just arbitration of
our common affairs, who can? The answer is both radical and discomforting. For
there is only one alternative if government cannot successfully provide: we must
do so ourselves,


It is more evolution than revolution, for it is dawning on people across the
world that in order to fix our problems, there is no one to look to but
ourselves.


But if it’s true that government is less and less able to manage our collective
affairs, it seems we have little choice but to take that burden upon our own
shoulders. We must learn anew to look to ourselves to produce the effects we
desire, to take responsibility for ourselves and for others, and to cooperate
and negotiate with each other, instead of leaving that arbitration to an
evidently imperfect mechanism. As these habits spread, a new and more durable
order may emerge, not – as now – legislated from above but built from the ground
up, by people acting upon their beliefs and engaging with each other.

