The Meaning of Human Existence
==============================

By **Edward O. Wilson**

![](/bookimg/themeaningofhumanexistence.jpg)

Does humanity have a special place in the Universe? What is the meaning of our
personal lives? I believe that we’ve learned enough about the Universe and
ourselves to ask these questions in an answerable, testable form.

The time has come, I believe, to make a proposal about the possibility of
unification of the two great branches of learning. Would the humanities care to
colonize the sciences?

How about replacing science fiction, the imagining of fantasy by a single mind,
with new worlds of far greater diversity based on real science from many minds?

We are about to abandon natural selection, the process that created us, in order
to direct our own evolution by volitional selection—the process of redesigning
our biology and human nature as we wish them to be.

No longer will the prevalence of some genes (more precisely alleles, variations
in codes of the same gene) over others be the result of environmental forces,
most of which are beyond human control or even understanding. The genes and
their prescribed traits can be what we choose.

To take this step in our journey, to get hold of the human condition, we need
next a much broader definition of history than is conventionally used.

To grasp the present human condition it is necessary to add the biological
evolution of a species and the circumstances that led to its prehistory.

When viewed across its entire traverse, the history of humanity also becomes the
key to learning how and why our species arose and survived.

Human existence may be simpler than we thought. There is no predestination, no
unfathomed mystery of life.

Instead, we are self-made, independent, alone, and fragile, a biological species
adapted to live in a biological world. What counts for long-term survival is
intelligent self-understanding, based upon a greater independence of thought
than that tolerated today even in our most advanced democratic societies.

Are we built to pledge our lives to a group, even to the risk of death, or the
opposite, built to place ourselves and our families above all else?

Scientific evidence, a good part of it accumulated during the past twenty years,
suggests that we are both of these things simultaneously. Each of us is
inherently conflicted.

We are all genetic chimeras, at once saints and sinners, champions of the truth
and hypocrites—not because humanity has failed to reach some foreordained
religious or ideological ideal, but because of the way our species originated
across millions of years of biological evolution.

We are all genetic chimeras, at once saints and sinners, champions of the truth
and hypocrites—not because humanity has failed to reach some foreordained
religious or ideological ideal, but because of the way our species originated
across millions of years of biological evolution.

Within biology itself, the key to the mystery is the force that lifted prehuman
social behavior to the human level. The leading candidate is multilevel
selection, by which hereditary social behavior improves the competitive ability
not just of individuals within groups but among groups as a whole.

People prefer to be with others who look like them, speak the same dialect, and
hold the same beliefs. An amplification of this evidently inborn predisposition
leads with frightening ease to racism and religious bigotry.

Then, also with frightening ease, good people do bad things.

Biologists have identified at the time of this writing twenty evolutionary lines
in the modern-world fauna that attained advanced social life based on some
degree of altruistic division of labor.

Most arose in the insects. Several were independent origins in marine shrimp,
and three appeared among the mammals—that is, in two African mole rats, and us.

All reached this level through the same narrow gateway: solitary individuals, or
mated pairs, or small groups of individuals built nests and foraged from the
nest for food with which they progressively raised their offspring to maturity.

By no later than half a million years ago, however, groups of the ancestral
species Homo erectus were maintaining campsites with controlled fire—the
equivalent of nests—from which they foraged and returned with food, including a
substantial portion of meat.

A conflict ensued between individual-level selection, with individuals competing
with other individuals in the same group, on the one side, and group-level
selection, with competition among groups, on the other.

Within groups selfish individuals beat altruistic individuals, but groups of
altruists beat groups of selfish individuals. Or, risking oversimplification,
individual selection promoted sin, while group selection promoted virtue.

So it came to pass that humans are forever conflicted by their prehistory of
multilevel selection. They are suspended in unstable and constantly changing
positions between the two extreme forces that created us.

To give in completely to the instinctual urgings born from individual selection
would be to dissolve society. At the opposite extreme, to surrender to the
urgings from group selection would turn us into angelic robots—the outsized
equivalents of ants.

We will find a way eventually to live with our inborn turmoil, and perhaps find
pleasure in viewing it as the primary source of our creativity.

So what could the hypothetical aliens learn from us that has any value to them?
The correct answer is the humanities.

To understand cultural evolution from the outside looking in, as opposed to the
inside looking out, the way we do it, requires interpreting all of the intricate
feelings and constructions of the human mind. It requires intimate contact with
people and knowledge of countless personal histories. It describes the way a
thought is translated into a symbol or artifact. All this the humanities do.
They are the natural history of culture, and our most private and precious
heritage.

For the next few decades, most major technological advances are likely to occur
in what is often denoted BNR: biotechnology, nanotechnology, and robotics. In
pure science the secular grails now sought along the broad frontier include the
deduction of how life originated on Earth, along with the creation of artificial
organisms, gene substitution and surgically precise modification of the genome,
discovery of the physical nature of consciousness, and, not least, the
construction of robots that can think faster and work more efficiently than
humans in most blue-collar and white-collar labor. At the present time these
envisioned advances are the stuff of science fiction. But not for long. Within a
few decades they will be reality.

With more and more decision making and work done by robots, what will be left
for humans to do? Do we really want to compete biologically with robot
technology by using brain implants and genetically improved intelligence and
social behavior? This choice would mean a sharp departure away from the human
nature we have inherited, and a fundamental change in the human condition.

We are doing very well in science and technology. But let’s also promote the
humanities, that which makes us human, and not use science to mess around with
the wellspring of this, the absolute and unique potential of the human future.

What was the driving force in the origin of human social behavior? The prehumans
of Africa approached the threshold of [\*](#ASIN:B00J8R3IC8;LOC:617) advanced
social organization in a manner parallel to that in the lower animals but
attained it in a very different manner.

The origin of the human condition is best explained by the natural selection for
social interaction—the inherited propensities to communicate, recognize,
evaluate, bond, cooperate, compete, and from all these the deep warm pleasure of
belonging to your own special group. Social intelligence enhanced by group
selection made Homo sapiens the first fully dominant species in Earth’s history.

Humanities treat the strange properties of human nature by taking them as “just
is.”The meaning of human existence cannot be explained until “just is” is
replaced with “just is, because.”

It is true that we form societies dependent on cooperation, labor
specialization, and frequent acts of altruism. But where social insects are
ruled almost entirely by instinct, we base labor division on transmission of
culture. Also we, unlike social insects, are too selfish to behave like cells in
an organism. Almost all human beings seek their own destiny. They want to
reproduce themselves, or at least enjoy some form of sexual practice adapted to
that end. They will always revolt against slavery; they will not be treated like
worker ants.

We alone among all species have grasped the reality of the living world, seen
the beauty of nature, and given value to the individual. We alone have measured
the quality of mercy among our own kind. Might we now extend the same concern to
the living world that gave us birth?

The human mind did not evolve as an externally guided progression toward either
pure reason or emotional fulfillment. It remains as it has always been, an
instrument of survival that employs both reason and emotion. It emerged in its
present form from a labyrinth of large and small steps, in a series that is one
out of millions possible.

The particular conglomerate of reason and emotion we call human nature was just
one of many conceivable outcomes Human nature is the ensemble of hereditary
regularities in mental development that bias cultural evolution in one direction
as opposed to others and thus connect genes to culture in the brain of every
person.

No scientific quest is more important to humanity than to nail the phantom of
conscious thought.

The physical basis of consciousness won’t be an easy phenomenon to grasp. The
human brain is the most complex system known in the Universe, either organic or
inorganic.

What does the story of our species tell us? By this I mean the narrative made
visible by science, not the archaic version soaked in religion and ideology.

We were created not by a supernatural intelligence but by chance and necessity
as one species out of millions of species in Earth’s biosphere.

So, what is the meaning of human existence?

We have become the mind of the planet and perhaps our entire corner of the
galaxy as well. We can do with Earth what we please.

Human beings are not wicked by nature. We have enough intelligence, goodwill,
generosity, and enterprise to turn Earth into a paradise both for ourselves and
for the biosphere that gave us birth.

Our leaders, religious, political, and business, mostly accept supernatural
explanations of the human existence. Even if privately skeptical, they have
little interest in opposing religious leaders and unnecessarily stirring up the
populace, from whom they draw power and privilege.

We need to understand ourselves in both evolutionary and psychological terms in
order to plan a more rational, catastrophe-proof future.

If the heuristic and analytic power of science can be joined with the
introspective creativity of the humanities, human existence will rise to an
infinitely more productive and interesting meaning.

[amzn:B00J8R3IC8]

