The New Robber Barons
=====================

By **Janet M. Tavakoli**

![](/bookimg/thenewrobberbarons.jpg)

This book is a compilation of selected articles written after September 2008 and
ending in 2012, a few months after the implosion of MF Global.  It’s a selective
chronicle of how the New Robber Barons prospered—and continue to prosper—at the
expense of those without government connections.

Every year since the financial crisis, government has become less representative
of its electorate.  Government has become a service industry to its money
raising cronies.

The largest Ponzi scheme in the history of the capital markets is the
relationship between failed mortgage lenders and investment banks that
securitized the risky overpriced loans and sold these packages to other
investors—a Ponzi scheme by every definition applied to Madoff. These and other
related deeds led to the largest global credit meltdown in the history of the
world.

The real problem is there were too many outright liars hiding behind the curtain
of structured finance.

If a high-on-crack driver crashed his speeding rental car into your house and
killed your spouse, you would be outraged if law enforcers took bribes and gave
the driver a pass on a blood test. If the judge then merely fined the killer and
ordered you to pay it, you would appeal, wondering what happened to justice. If
the government then handed the crack-driver keys to a bigger rental car and
presented you with the rental bill, you would certainly protest. How is it,
then, that you have remained largely silent in the face of the same sort of
behaviour by Wall Street and Washington?

President Obama has not yet condemned Wall Street's massive fraud, and
Congress's bailout methods rewarded Wall Street's malicious mischief. The House
just passed a bigger bailout bill that will give too-big-to-fail Wall Street
banks access to $4 trillion dollars the next time they crash the economy.

The money cartel is as dangerous as the Mexican drug cartel. Its weapons of
choice are taxpayer subsidized funds for swarms of Washington lobbyists, "money
jobs" for politically connected yes men, and lucrative positions for former
regulators and the law firms that hire them. Wall Street is winning the class
war, and taxpayers supplied the arms. Wall Street's PR spin, lobbying, money
train to Congress, and bullying of fact finders have kept much of the truth away
from the public. Frank Rich of The New York Times pointed out: "What we don't
know will hurt us, and quite possibly on a more devastating scale than any [Al]
Qaeda attack. Americans must be told the full story of how Wall Street gamed and
inflated the housing bubble, made out like bandits, and then left millions of
households in ruin."

The largest Ponzi scheme in the history of the capital markets is the
relationship between failed mortgage lenders and investment banks that
securitized the risky overpriced loans and sold these packages to other
investors—a Ponzi scheme by every definition applied to Madoff. These and other
related deeds led to the largest global credit meltdown in the history of the
world.

We have the solutions. We need the will to implement them.

The general financial meltdown experienced in September 2008 was accompanied by
the suppression of facts and self-serving misinformation by many of the key
players.  Capital buffers and hedges were insufficient, and the controversial
choice was made to recapitalize the banks without inquiry into the causes and
culprits.  Unfortunately, the bailout was also done without conditions and no
meaningful steps have been taken that will prevent a similar global financial
catastrophe.

The rating agencies’ problems run deep.  In late 2003, the Financial Times took
rating agencies to task for misrating debt issued by scandal-ridden Parmalat,
Enron and WorldCom.

By this time, the rating agencies had morphed into a cartel of sorts.  They
competed for market share and raced each other’s “standards" to the bottom. 

When rating agencies make mistakes in securitizations backed by debt, the losses
tend to be permanent and unfixable. The sole source of income is the portfolio
of assets. When they repeatedly fail to understand the risk of the underlying
assets—as they have done over several years for a variety of
securitizations—they blow the entire job.

The Commercial Financial Services’ (CFS) debacle provides a stunning early
example of the rating agencies’ incompetence. 

All three rating agencies gave investment grade ratings to securitizations that
merited a junk rating.

The financial implosion of 2008 was not a “black swan” event or an unforeseeable
problem.

The banks that ran the alternative banking system played a starring role while
the rating agencies played a key, supporting role.

In other words, either through intention or incompetence the rating agencies
lied in the sense [\*](#ASIN:B007AL01HY;LOC:3285) that they made false
statements that had grave consequences for investors and the global financial
markets.

Rating agencies have not been held accountable for past poor performance.  The
possibility of malfeasance or collusion with fraud has been skirted rather than
addressed.

Until there is an objective reproducible and reliable method of providing credit
ratings to securitizations, it will be impossible to rehabilitate the
alternative banking system.

Just because the problem of creating a viable global credit rating system is
difficult doesn’t mean it shouldn’t be done.  In fact, it is precisely because
it is difficult that there is a great need to thoroughly address the issue.

While fraud wasn't the only issue, it was and is a significant contributor to
the credit bubble.

We can expect more of the same if we continue to let banks off with a slap on
the wrist for malfeasance--along with a taxpayer subsidized fine--while banks
neither admit nor deny wrongdoing. [\*](#ASIN:B007AL01HY;LOC:3688)

We bailed out banks that were the key architects of much of our national misery
and currency destruction. Those living in poverty will have a much more
difficult time bettering themselves, as much of the middle class sinks.

Both the United States and the United Kingdom have had a coordinated
non-response to financial reform. If a drunk driver killed your neighbors and
crashed the car into your house, you wouldn't expect a police officer to hand
the offender a bottle of whiskey and the keys to a bigger, faster, and more
powerful car. You would be outraged if the officer said he would only impose a
fine, and then made you lend the drunk the money to pay the fine. Yet this is
the modus operandi of our financial system, and now financial drunk drivers
refuse blood tests and huff that their seat belts were fastened.

Taxpayers are paid only peanuts in fees for these massive subsidies while being
squeezed with high interest rates and mortgage foreclosures--after our economy
was devastated chiefly by several banks' malicious mischief.

Wall Street banks bet against our entire society when they created and sold
phony securities that fueled fraudulent mortgage lending. That activity was
profitable for some firms (Goldman) and unprofitable for others (Lehman,
Citigroup, Merrill Lynch, and more). Yet in every case, it was control fraud.
CEOs and bankers grew rich while the financial institutions that employed them
often imploded. The agents of the fraud prospered while American society and the
American economy were massively damaged.

We deserve better than a third world economy divided by ultra-rich on one side
and debt-ridden middle class and dirt poor citizens on the other.

Until we have real global financial reform and restrain the banks, we won't have
sustained growth.

Unrepentant banks resist reform and dilute attempts at regulation while soaking
up ongoing subsidies. All of this is dead-end financing at the expense of
citizens that saved their money and pay taxes.

Everything we want or need in life comes to us through our relationships with
other people.  The quality of our relationships, or human wealth, defines the
quality of our lives.

[amzn:B007AL01HY]

