The Strange Non-Death of Neoliberalism
======================================

By **Colin Crouch**

There are many branches and brands of neoliberalism, but behind them stands one
dominant theme: that free markets  in which individuals maximise their material
interests provide the best means for satisfying human aspirations,  and that
markets are in particular to be preferred over states and politics, which are at
best inefficient and  at worse threats to freedom.

At the heart of the conundrum is the fact that actually existing, as opposed to
ideologically pure, neoliberalism  is nothing like as devoted to free markets as
is claimed. It is, rather, devoted to the dominance of public life  by the giant
corporation.

Many corporations become not just mighty pressures on, but major insider
participants in, the political process.  This is something which no economic or
political theory defends or advocates in any way; but it a central  reality of
our public life.

Keynesianism’s crisis let to its collapse rather than to adjustments being made
to it because there was something  fundamentally wrong with its ideas, but
because he classes in whose interests it primarily operated, the manual  workers
of western industrial society, were in historical decline and losing heir social
power. In contrast, the  forces that gain most from neoliberalism – global
corporations, particularly in the financial sector – maintain  their importance
more or less unchallenged.

These then were the principal ingredients of the socio-economic order that came
eventually to be know as social  democracy:

Keynesian demand management in which government action, far from trying to
destroy markets, sought to sustain  them at levels avoiding self-destructive
booms and slumps alike:

Strong welfare states that enabled people to receive some services in kind
rather than through the market and  some forms of income not dependent on market
performance or property-ownership, bringing diversity to what would  otherwise
be purely market-determined life chances;

In some cases, neo-corporate industrial relations, trying to balance workers’
freedom to organise with the need  for labour markets to function efficiently.

What went wrong with it?

We never know that one particular set of ideas contain the right answers; even
if it does today, it might not be  equipped to face unexpected challenges
tomorrow. Monolithic doctrines that are certain that they have a monopoly  on
wisdom and which crush all opposition usually end by being confronted by
challenges to which they have not  responses in their repertoire. This was the
case with the Soviet communism. Neoliberal ideologues certainly show  strong
tendencies in that direction, but the practical realities of life on democracies
force them to  compromise.

(Concerning issues like distribution, pollution and environmental damage). We
are told that these are not matters  for firms, as their duty is to maximise
shareholders’ profits; if we want action on them we will have to turn to
politics. But when we arrive at the door of politics we find Chicago/Virginia
people waiting there to warn us  never

to turn to politics for anything, as governments are at best incompetent and at
worst corruptly self-seeking. We  are left therefore with no capacity to
criticise what firms do…

The firms that benefit from a permissive approach to oligopoly are not
themselves required to abide by the strict  principles of the neoliberal
doctrines from which they benefit. There is absolutely no evidence that the
corporate giants of the USA consider that they should not lobby government in
case this amounts to an  undesirable mixing of polity and economy.

A former chief economist of the IMF, Simon Johnson, has claimed that the
financial sector has now captured  control of the US government in a manner
normally associated with developing countries.

Economic and political power translate into each other. An economy dominated by
giant firms makes this worse as  it generates very high concentrations of
wealth. Not only can firms convert this wealth into political  influence, but
they can use the capacity for strategy given to them by their size and
organisational hierarchies  to pursue political purposes and become political
actors.

For example, many marketisation and privatisation strategies have as one of
their goals a reduction in the power  of public sector professionals. But a
consequence has often been an increase in the power of private  contractors.

The deregulation agenda that led to the irresponsible development of financial
markets during the 90s was itself  a result of impressive lobbying in the US
Congress and administration by banking interests.

The move away from a state that provides services directly to one that
subcontracts to private firms only serves  to increase very considerably the
scope for dubious interactions…

Looking towards the future, the banks now know for certain that governments will
bail them out and will be  willing later to make cuts in public services in
order to finance the rescue operation. As a result, they will  now take higher
risks than before.

Shareholder maximisation is not the only approach to corporate governance to be
experienced by modern capitalism:  French, German and Japanese capitalism, for
example, all developed with a concept of diversity of stakeholders  to whom a
firm owed responsibility, directly and not on route to looking after shareholder
value; customers,  employees, bond-holders, sometimes local communities or a
national interest. These models were generally pushed  aside during the 1990s,
as the Anglo-American model asserted its superiority as the most perfect
expression of  neoliberal ideas.

In face, the Anglo-American corporation is nothing more in law than a bundle of
shares – unlike, for example, a  German corporation, which is seen in law as
‘belonging’ to a wider range of stakeholders.

One very perceptible example of conflict of interest between shareholders and
other stakeholders, which presents  us very directly with the transfer of risk
away from the former, concerns occupational and private pension  funds…The fund
uses this money to invest in various financial markets…This by-product of
pension insurance  activity, rather than the provision of pensions, became the
primary business of pension funds… The actual paying  out of pension funds
therefore became burdensome to them, especially as increasing longevity was
playing havoc  with their actuarial calculations.

The description…of how financial markets have developed under the shareholder
maximisation model implies a  parasitical system the might easily be removed to
general advantage. Unfortunately, matters are more complex  than that. Many
millions or people, including many on relatively low incomes, particularly in
the Anglo-American  world, have been nourished on crumbs from the rich man’s
talbe.

Whereas the tight labour markets and regulated capitalism of the Keynesian
period had seen a gradual reduction in  inequalities or wealth in all advanced
countries, the following period was to see a reversal of these trends,  with the
highest rewards going to those working in financial institutions.

It is common in democratic societies for leaders to develop torturous arguments
to claim that everything they do  is democratic…even if these were things very
different from they claimed they would do at the previous election.  This
democratic legislation is then used to discredit critics, even if these actually
represent a majority of  opinion…the political power of corporations constitutes
a widely accepted but highly undemocratic feature of our  de facto
constitutions.

The Virginia school of public choice theory concentrates on the likelihood that
politicians and other public  officials will pursue their own career goals
rather than any social good… This logic then arrives at market at a  superior
device for tackling problems.

Thinkers on the left maintain their historic reservations concerning the
capacity of markets to solve problems –  unless heavily regulated by
regulation…where the neoliberal right points to ‘markets’ it is often indicating
corporations…the state, seen so long by the left as the source of countervailing
power against markets and  corporations, is today likely to be the committed
ally of giant corporations, whatever the ideological origins  of the parties
governing the state.

It is claimed by both political democracy and the market that they can harness
the individual strivings of  powerful and talented individuals to a collective
good.

Democracy does this by requiring aspirant rulers to seek legitimisation through
periodic elections and, between  times, to accept continuing investigations,
scrutiny and criticism. The market achieves it by producing goods  and services
that customers freely want to buy.

Both political and economic power existed long before attempts were made to
subject them to democracy and the  market; and neither of these can be said to
have predominated in human history, which has mainly been the story  of the
domination and exploitation of the many by the powerful few.

The claims of all...components of civil society – the autonomous politicaql
parties, the church, the campaigning  groups, the voluntary body, the
professions – are potentially dangerous. This who claim to act ethically can be
pursuing personal ambitions, and even acting corruptly, just as much as any
businessperson or politician.

One thinks, for example, of the way scientists studying the impact of human
action on climate change are harried  by climate change denial groups funded by
corporations.

Neoliberalism came to prominence by triumphing over what had been…30 previous
years of declining social and  economic inequality and growing attention to
social needs and collective goals, all primarily making use of the  power of the
democratic nation state.

The favoured doctrines of the contemporary political right now seem as tattered
and those of the left had become  by the 1980s.

Democracy’s problem that mass publics are too remote and too disaggregated to
ensure politicians are under  appropriate detailed constraint, certainly
compared with that exercised by corporate power… parties and mass  media are
becoming unfit for purpose. Political parties are losing their links with
movements of opinion  emerging from the mass of people, leading to them seeking
extensive funds to generate synthetic links between  themselves and that public.
The only major sources of large funds are corporations and extremely wealthy
individuals.

There is no political or economic theory that can demonstrate how giant
corporations, relatively free from  constraints of the market, or capable of
dominating them, and increasingly becoming the main sources of power  over
politics, can be trusted with our collective goals.

Governments are usually seen, correctly, as the only organisations powerful
enough to impose any different  criteria of judgement, if the creation of wealth
through economic efficiency is deemed morally inadequate or to  prevent the
achievement of other goods.

Indeed, one of the main achievements of the neoliberal political project is to
place more or less all institutes  in society – universities, hospitals, and
charities as well as governments – under an obligation to behave as  though they
were business corporations.

At every point we find that democratic market societies under the influence of
neoliberal ideas throw more and  more power, influence and privilege at the
extremely wealthy, especially the wielders of large corporate
resources…Ironically, this becomes in turn yet another means by which
corporations become the dominant  organisations in society.

But what do we do when the assertion of national citizenship rights becomes our
only defence against the power of  trans-national corporations to disrupt our
lives?

Civil society will be stronger the more the state and the giant firm are
challenged – by churches, voluntary  organisations, professions and other
participants in he fragmented world of values – and required to participate  in
a pluralist dialogue that escapers their control. We need strong civil societies
in which a diversity of  kinds of pressure is able to flourish, so that we can
compare and criticise.

