The Ways of the World
=====================
![](/bookimg/thewaysofworld.jpg)

The United States Geological Survey reports that China consumed 6,651 million
tonnes of cement in the years 2011–13 compared with the 4,405 million tonnes the
United States used over the period 1900–1999.


How and why could this be?


The crisis of 2008, manufactured mainly in the housing markets of the American
South-West, produced millions of unemployed workers in the industrial regions of
China by early 2009. [\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:94)


So what did the Chinese do and how did they do it? They engineered a massive
wave of investment in physical infrastructures.


 After 2008 at least a quarter of China’s GDP was derived from housing
construction alone and roughly half of China’s GDP and almost all of its growth
[\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:112) were attributable to investment in the built
environment. This was how China got out of the recession. Hence the pouring of
all that concrete.


There is no question that China took a leading role in saving global capitalism
from disaster after 2008 with its massive urbanisation and investments in the
built environment. How did the Chinese do it? The basic answer is simple. They
debt-financed. The Central Committee of the Communist Party told the banks to
lend no matter what the risk.


The growth of the Chinese debt has been spectacular. It has nearly doubled since
2008.


Unlike Greece, the debt is owed in renminbis and not dollars or euros. The
Chinese central bank has plenty of foreign reserves to cover the debt if need be
and could print its own money at will. [\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:124)


Investing half of GDP growth in fixed capital that produces declining growth
rates is not a good proposition.


So how do the Chinese propose to deal with their current problems of disposing
of their surplus capital?


To start with, the Chinese are planning to build a single city to house 130
million people pinned together by high-speed transport and communications
networks.


This debt-financed project is designed to absorb surpluses of capital and of
labour well into the future.


China is not the only place contemplating projects of this sort.


Turkey plans to convert Istanbul into a city of some 45 million
[\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:141) .


Building booms, with rising property prices and rents, are in evidence in almost
every major city in the world.


The Chinese are also looking beyond their borders for ways to absorb their
surplus capital and labour.


There is a project to rebuild the so-called ‘Silk Road’.


The rail network would run from the East Coast of China through Inner and Outer
Mongolia and the central Asian states to Tehran and Istanbul, from where it will
fan out across Europe as well as branching off to Moscow.


Lower costs and faster times on the Silk Road in the future will convert a
largely empty area in central Asia into a string of thriving metropolises.


The Initiative for the Integration of the Regional Infrastructure in South
America (IIRSA) was launched in 2000 as an ambitious programme to create
transport infrastructures for the circulation of capital and commodities over
twelve South American states.


In Africa the Chinese are already hard at work integrating the transport systems
of East Africa and are interested in constructing transcontinental railways from
one coast to the other. [\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:165)


I recount these stories to illustrate how the world’s geography has been and is
being constantly made, remade and sometimes even destroyed in order to absorb
rapidly accumulating surpluses of capital. The simple answer to the question of
why this is happening is: because the reproduction of capital accumulation
requires it.


This raises questions about what the ways of our future world might look like.
Do we want to live in a city of 130 million people? Is pouring concrete
everywhere in order to keep capital from falling into crisis a reasonable thing
to do?


If sustaining and reproducing capital as a dominant form of political economy
requires, as seems to be the case, pouring concrete everywhere at an
ever-increasing rate, then surely it is time to at least question if not reject
the system that produces such excesses.


The ghetto has attracted a good deal of attention as one of the major social
problems of the American city.


In British cities, fears of ‘polarisation’ and ‘ghettoisation’ have also been
rising. It is generally held that ghettos are bad things and that it would be
socially desirable to eliminate them, preferably without eliminating the
populations they contain.


The theory predicts that poor groups must, of necessity, live where they can
least afford to live.


Our objective is to eliminate ghettos. Therefore, the only valid policy with
respect to this objective is to eliminate the conditions which give rise to the
truth of the theory.


The simplest approach here is to eliminate those mechanisms which serve to
generate the theory. The mechanism in this case is very simple – competitive
bidding for the use of the land. If we eliminate this mechanism, we will
presumably eliminate the result.


This is immediately suggestive of a policy for eliminating ghettos, which would
presumably supplant competitive bidding with a socially controlled urban land
market and socialised control of the housing sector.


If we regard the total housing stock of an urban area as a social (as opposed to
a private) good, then obviously the community has already paid for the old
housing. [\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:575)


We have an enormous quantity of social capital locked up in the housing stock,
but in a private market system for land and housing, the value of the housing is
not always measured in terms of its use as shelter and residence, but in terms
of the amount received in market exchange, which may be affected by external
factors such as speculation.


Uranium became a resource with technological advances in nuclear physics, and
people become resources when they are forced to sell their labour on the market
in order to survive.


If we ‘urban renew’, we merely move the poverty around; if we don’t, we merely
sit by and watch decay.


Although all serious analysts concede the seriousness of the ghetto problem, few
call into question the forces which rule the very heart of our economic system.


Thus we discuss everything except the basic characteristics of a capitalist
market economy.


They eventually lead us to discover that capitalist solutions provide no
foundation for dealing with deteriorated social conditions.


In fact, mapping even more evidence of man’s patent inhumanity to man is
counter-revolutionary in the sense that it allows the bleeding-heart liberal in
us to pretend we are contributing to a solution when in fact we are not.


China compensated for a substantial decline in its export trade after 2008,
following the collapse of consumer [\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:1460) demand in the
USA, by a state-led strategy of forcing surplus capital and labour into huge
urbanisation and physical infrastructure projects. These allowed China to
maintain relatively high rates of growth after 2009 while the rest of the world
floundered.


As I write this in 2015, there is growing evidence of overinvestment in the
built environment in China: it will be interesting to see what transpires as the
authorities struggle to prevent overaccumulation in the secondary circuit
threatening the health of not only China’s economy but that of the whole world.


Understanding urbanisation requires more than an analysis of capital flows or
migratory streams. Citizenship, belonging, alienation, solidarities, class and
other forms of collective politics have crucial roles in the production of
spaces of intimacy and social relations as well as the spaces occupied by public
functions.


Understanding urbanisation requires more than an analysis of capital flows or
migratory streams. Citizenship, belonging, alienation, solidarities, class and
other forms of collective politics have crucial roles in the production of
spaces of intimacy and social relations as well as the spaces occupied by public
functions.


In all of these respects, the claims generally made that neoliberalism is about
open competition rather than monopoly control or limited competition within
oligopolistic structures turn out to be fraudulent, masked as usual by the
fetish worship of market freedoms. Free trade does not mean fair trade.


The continuing politics of accumulation by dispossession has been masked in
recent years by the ‘necessity’ for the politics of austerity, which is nothing
more than organised dispossession, as has been dramatically and sadly
illustrated by Greece. In a civilised world nothing so barbaric should have ever
been contemplated. But from the Mexican debt crisis of 1982 onwards,
accumulation by dispossession has become standard politics within global
capitalism under the name of ‘structural adjustment and austerity’ for the
masses, while bailing out the bankers and handsomely rewarding them for their
egregious errors.


On top of all this comes a class politics of austerity that is being pursued for
political and not for economic reasons.


The assault on the environment and the well-being of the people is palpable and
it is taking place for political and class, not economic, reasons.


Anti-capitalist struggle is about the abolition of that class relation between
capital and labour in production that permits the production and appropriation
of surplus value by capital. The ultimate aim of anti-capitalist struggle is,
quite simply, the abolition of that class relation.


The problem with worker control has been that the focus of struggle has been the
factory as a privileged site of production of surplus value and the privileging
of the industrial working class as the vanguard of the proletariat, the main
revolutionary agent.


So we have a choice: mourn the passing of the possibility of revolution or
change our conception of the proletariat to that of the hordes of unorganised
urbanisation producers and explore their distinctive revolutionary capacities
and powers.


How then does one organise a city? This, it seems to me, is one of the key
quetions that the left will have to answer if anti-capitalist struggle is to be
revitalised in the years to come.


All those whose labours are engaged in producing and reproducing the city have a
collective right not only to that which they produce but also to decide on what
is to be produced where and how.


The forces unleashed by the rise of capitalism have re-engineered the world many
times over since 1750.


If, as Marx once averred, our task is not so much to understand the world as to
change it, then, it has to be said, capitalism has done a pretty good job of
following his advice.


Most of these dramatic changes have occurred without bothering first to
understand how the world worked or what the consequences might be.
[\*](#ASIN:B014RT1LJI;LOC:6066)


If we are to collectively change this world into a more rational and humane
configuration through conscious interventions, then we must first learn to
understand far better than is now the case the ways of this world, what we do in
it and with what consequences.


So where shall we start our revolutionary anti-capitalist movement? Mental
conceptions? The relation to nature? Daily life and reproductive practices?
Social relations? Technologies and organisational forms? Labour processes? The
capture of institutions and their revolutionary transformation?


The revolution has to be a movement in every sense of that word. If it cannot
move within, across and through the different spheres then it will ultimately go
nowhere at all.


Those with a deep knowledge of how the relation to nature works need to ally
with those deeply familiar with how institutional and administrative
arrangements function, how science and technology can be mobilised, how daily
life and social relations can most easily be reorganised, how mental conceptions
can be changed, and how production and the labour process can be reconfigured.


A study of the multiple interlocking contradictions of capital allows us to see
more clearly the impossibilities, the insanity and irrational consequences of
the endless accumulation that capital demands. It is imperative that we begin to
think through the political strategies required to confront the excesses of
capital in the here and now and find openings for the construction of viable
political-economic alternatives.

[amzn:B014RT1LJI]

