Thinking in Systems: A Primer
=============================

By **Donella H Meadows**

Hunger, poverty, environmental degradation, economic instability, unemployment,
chronic disease, drug addiction, and war, for example, persist in spite of the
analytical ability and technical brilliance that have been directed toward
eradicating them. No one deliberately creates those problems, no one wants them
to persist, but they persist nonetheless. That is because they are intrinsically
systems problems—undesirable behaviours characteristic of the system structures
that produce them. They will yield only as we reclaim our intuition, stop
casting blame, see the system as the source of its own problems, and find the
courage and wisdom to restructure it. Obvious. Yet subversive. An old way of
seeing. Yet somehow new. Comforting, in that the solutions are in our hands.
Disturbing, because we must do things, or at least see things and think about
things, in a different way.

No one intends to produce a society with rampant drug addiction and crime, but
consider the combined purposes and consequent actions of the actors involved:

* desperate people who want quick relief from psychological pain
* farmers, dealers, and bankers who want to earn money
* pushers who are less bound by civil law than are the police who oppose them
* governments that make harmful substances illegal and use police power to interdict them
* wealthy people living in close proximity to poor people
* nonaddicts who are more interested in protecting themselves than in encouraging recovery of addicts

Altogether, these make up a system from which it is extremely difficult to
eradicate drug addiction and crime.

Maybe the worst mistake of this kind has been the adoption of the GNP as the
measure of national economic success. The GNP is the gross national product, the
money value of the final goods and services produced by the economy. As a
measure of human welfare, it has been criticized almost from the moment it was
invented: The gross national product does not allow for the health of our
children, the quality of their education or the joy of their play. It does not
include the beauty of our poetry or the strength of our marriages, the
intelligence of our public debate or the integrity of our public officials. It
measures neither our wit nor our courage, neither our wisdom nor our learning,
neither our compassion nor our devotion to our country, it measures everything
in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.

We have a system of national accounting that bears no resemblance to the
national economy whatsoever, for it is not the record of our life at home but
the fever chart of our consumption. The GNP lumps together goods and bads. (If
there are more car accidents and medical bills and repair bills, the GNP goes
up.) It counts only marketed goods and services. (If all parents hired people to
bring up their children, the GNP would go up.) It does not reflect
distributional equity. (An expensive second home for a rich family makes the GNP
go up more than an inexpensive basic home for a poor family.) It measures effort
rather achievement, gross production and consumption rather than efficiency. New
light bulbs that give the same light with one-eighth the electricity and that
last ten times as long make the GNP go down.

If you define the goal of a society as GNP, that society will do its best to
produce GNP. It will not produce welfare, equity, justice, or efficiency unless
you define a goal and regularly measure and report the state of welfare, equity,
justice, or efficiency. The world would be a different place if instead of
competing to have the highest per capita GNP, nations competed to have the
highest per capita stocks of wealth with the lowest throughput, or the lowest
infant mortality, or the greatest political freedom, or the cleanest
environment, or the smallest gap between the rich and the poor.

Insistence on a single culture shuts down learning and cuts back resilience. Any
system, biological, economic, or social, that gets so encrusted that it cannot
self-evolve, a system that systematically scorns experimentation and wipes out
the raw material of innovation, is doomed over the long term on this highly
variable planet.

The idea of making a complex system do just what you want it to do can be
achieved only temporarily, at best. We can never fully understand our world, not
in the way our reductionist science has led us to expect. Our science itself,
from quantum theory to the mathematics of chaos, leads us into irreducible
uncertainty. For any objective other than the most trivial, we can't optimize;
we don't even know what to optimize. We can't keep track of everything. We can't
find a proper, sustainable relationship to nature, each other, or the
institutions we create, if we try to do it from the role of omniscient
conqueror.

For those who stake their identity on the role of omniscient conqueror, the
uncertainty exposed by systems thinking is hard to take. If you can't
understand, predict, and control, what is there to do?

Systems thinking leads to another conclusion, however, waiting, shining,
obvious, as soon as we stop being blinded by the illusion of control. It says
that there is plenty to do, of a different sort of “doing.” The future can't be
predicted, but it can be envisioned and brought lovingly into being. Systems
can't be controlled, but they can be designed and redesigned. We can't surge
forward with certainty into a world of no surprises, but we can expect surprises
and learn from them and even profit from them. We can't impose our will on a
system. We can listen to what the system tells us, and discover how its
properties and our values can work together to bring forth something much better
than could ever be produced by our will alone.

Living successfully in a world of systems requires more of us than our ability
to calculate. It requires our full humanity—our rationality, our ability to sort
out truth from falsehood, our intuition, our compassion, our vision, and our
morality.

**Our culture, obsessed with numbers, has given us the idea that what we can
measure is more important than what we can't measure. Think about that for a
minute. It means that we make quantity more important than quality. If quantity
forms the goals of our feedback loops, if quantity is the center of our
attention and language and institutions, if we motivate ourselves, rate
ourselves, and reward ourselves on our ability to produce quantity, then
quantity will be the result. You can look around and make up your own mind about
whether quantity or quality is the outstanding characteristic of the world in
which you live.**

**If something is ugly, say so. If it is tacky, inappropriate, out of
proportion, unsustainable, morally degrading, ecologically impoverishing, or
humanly demeaning, don't let it pass. Don't be stopped by the “if you can't
define it and measure it, I don't have to pay attention to it” ploy. No one can
define or measure justice, democracy, security, freedom, truth, or love. No one
can define or measure any value. But if no one speaks up for them, if systems
aren't designed to produce them, if we don't speak about them and point toward
their presence or absence, they will cease to exist.**

**One of the worst ideas humanity ever had was the interest rate, which led to
the further ideas of payback periods and discount rates, all of which provide a
rational, quantitative excuse for ignoring the long term. The official time
horizon of industrial society doesn't extend beyond what will happen after the
next election or beyond the payback period of current investments. The time
horizon of most families still extends farther than that—through the lifetimes
of children or grandchildren. Many Native American cultures actively spoke of
and considered in their decisions the effects on the seventh generation to come.
The longer the operant time horizon, the better the chances for survival.**

**Living successfully in a world of complex systems means expanding not only
time horizons and thought horizons; above all, it means expanding the horizons
of caring. There are moral reasons for doing that, of course. And if moral
arguments are not sufficient, then systems thinking provides the practical
reasons to back up the moral ones. The real system is interconnected. No part of
the human race is separate either from other human beings or from the global
ecosystem. It will not be possible in this integrated world for your heart to
succeed if your lungs fail, or for your company to succeed if your workers fail,
or for the rich in Los Angeles to succeed if the poor in Los Angeles fail, or
for Europe to succeed if Africa fails, or for the global economy to succeed if
the global environment fails. As with everything else about systems, most people
already know about the interconnections that make moral and practical rules turn
out to be the same rules. They just have to bring themselves to believe that
which they know.**

**Systems thinking by itself cannot bridge that gap, but it can lead us to the
edge of what analysis can do and then point beyond—to what can and must be done
by the human spirit.**

