Three Circles into One: Brexit Britain: how did we get here and what happens next?
==================================================================================
I will argue that the referendum result which led us to wake up in a different
country on that June morning in 2016 had roots which lay in the slow dissolution
of the national narrative of our identity, which was crafted after the Second
World War.

What is toxic, however, is the political process which started with the
referendum campaign and has continued ever since.

What is most remarkable about Britain’s history since 1945 is the scale of the
change in our overseas global position, and how easily this titanic process
passed in one swift generation.

It is hard to think of any other tremendous imperial power, in recent times or
earlier, which passed through such a transition so smoothly.

When the term ‘superpower’ became fashionable after 1945, coined by American
foreign policy professor William T. R. Fox, it was applied to three powers: the
United States, the USSR and the British Empire. Within twenty years all this had
almost entirely gone from our national narrative.

We passed from superpower to a new role as a crucial lynch pin, or so our
national narrative told us, of the structure of the civilised world.

In search of labour to rebuild a war-damaged Britain and its industries after
1945, we invited immigration from our empire, from the West Indies, from India
and Pakistan and Africa.

Anyone who thinks that there is, or has ever has been, an ideological commitment
in the heart of the US to free trade or to the collegiate leadership of the
liberal democracies, let alone to a place of special privilege for the United
Kingdom, will soon learn better when it comes to negotiating bilateral deals
with an American government of any party.

We have for Brexit, having been told that it was a pretty straightforward
matter. A deal to facilitate leaving, said Leavers, would be easily forthcoming
because it was in everyone’s best interest. This did not turn out to be so.
Perhaps the Leavers had forgotten that the institutions of the EU had a very
considerable interest in not making it easy for member states to leave.

It is therefore unsurprising that this unique failure of parliament has bred
deep frustration and damaged the reputation of the institution and its members.

We have seen worse constitutional and institutional chaos in our history.

Wondering foreigners see chaos in the home of what was arguably the western
world’s most stable and predictable democracy, and they, like the rest of us,
cannot see how it ends.

The crisis now feels much deeper than it has felt before because for the first
time, perhaps for centuries, we fear our institutions are failing us and that
our national narrative no longer convinces us.

It feels like crass incompetence. A great number of our fellow citizens are
threatened with the discovery that actual, immediate things they value and on
which they depend are likely to be taken away from them:

How can we begin to propose a better future for all those suddenly awake to the
danger of the disruption of their way of life by a process they assumed our
institutions would mediate?

There is nothing inevitable about the United Kingdom finding a way through the
present period to a satisfactory future. Such a future has to be articulated and
it has to find leaders of vision who are trusted by enough people to take us
there.

Our national narrative has collapsed, severely damaging trust in our
institutions, and it cannot be revived. There is no normal service to which we
can return.

A constitutional settlement will be needed to see that the ill-considered
head-on collision between referendum politics and parliamentary politics does
not happen again, with a written set of rules defining what our constitution is,
and how we change it; when a referendum should be used, and how parliament
should handle the consequences.

And there is plenty more to do. We have enormous disparities not just in wealth,
which may within reason be tolerated as inevitable in a free society, but in
health and education, which are not.

I have offered four narratives of the kind which we will need to consider once
the Brexit ditch is crossed. My belief is that there can be no return to a
status quo. We will be living in a different kind of country, one way or
another. We will need to choose what kind of country we want.

