We Have Never Been Neoliberal: A Manifesto for a Doomed Youth
=============================================================

By **Kean Birch**

![](/bookimg/wehaveneverbeenneoliberal.jpg)

This is an important book, and it should be read by anyone concerned about
constructing a progressive alternative to the destructive and dysfunctional
politics of the present. David Tyfield, Department of Sociology, Lancaster
University, UK [\*](#ASIN:B00SI6J9WI;LOC:28)

Unlike in Marx’s day a spectre isn't haunting Europe; it’s a stumbling,
rambling, mindless, heartless zombie we call neoliberalism. But is this
stumbling, incoherent monster really neoliberalism?

Could it be something else that we’ve missed all along? These questions are what
this book is all about.

What I focus on in this book is the mess the world has been left in after the
global financial system blew-up in 2007-08. Now, over six years later, we’re
still in the midst of it, even if it has morphed, or decayed slowly, into
something else.

A short and sweet definition of neoliberalism is that it represents a set of
ideas and policies aimed at installing markets as the main mechanism for
coordinating our societies. So, neoliberalism concerns the replacement of
collective social action or political decision-making with individual
interactions in (free) markets.

For now, it’s helpful to note that neoliberalism is generally associated with
the transformation of society and economy to institute these free markets. This
generally comprises five processes or policies: privatizing government services,
industries and other assets; liberalizing international trade and investment;
controlling inflation and supply-side dynamics rather than stimulating demand;
deregulating to ‘release’ business from impediments and to enable individual’s
to become more entrepreneurial; and the marketization of society through the
introduction of markets and commodification throughout society.

I have started to explore in more depth the intellectual histories of
neoliberalism in order to find answers to my questions. When did neoliberalism
emerge? How? What has changed since then? Are we neoliberal after all?

What I want to do now is provide a brief overview of the different ways
neoliberalism has been identified and defined in the academic literature. These
definitions, which are all critical perspectives on neoliberalism, can be split
into four groups.

The first is about what Michel Foucault calls governmentality, which involves
the rationalities and political technologies of neoliberalism.

The second strand of research focuses on the influence of neoliberal ideas and
morality; we could crudely call this the ideology of neoliberalism.

A third area of research is concerned with neoliberalism as a political or class
project. It is most obviously associated with the work of Marxists scholars like
David Harvey.

Finally, there is a burgeoning literature on neoliberalism as a process – so,
rather than a set of conditions or policies and their effects or outcomes,
several critics argue that neoliberalism is more properly thought of as a
process of neoliberalization. That is, as the extension of market-like rule
through state power.

What this brief run-down is meant to show is that neoliberalism is many things
to many people.

This chapter is about the influence of the actual ideas – intellectual and moral
– that neoliberals come up with.

One of the key ways that critics define neoliberalism is by referring to
monetarism; this includes the theoretical ideas supporting monetary policies
designed to maintain low inflation by controlling a country’s money supply.

Monetarism, in turn, is constituted by tight public spending and public spending
cuts – that is, austerity.

These ideas, monetarism and tight public spending, are related to one another in
neoliberal arguments, forming a key idea that has supposedly informed
policy-making since the 1970s.

I’ll finish by discussing what sorts of actual policies resulted from these
ideas; specifically, a massive expansion of the national public debt in
countries like the USA, UK and, to a lesser extent, Canada.

Many neoliberals had direct experience with totalitarianism, having been driven
out of their home countries because of their beliefs, and were driven by their
moral and ideological ideas as much as economic ones.

In the name of a scientific programme, converted into a plan of political
action, an immense political project is underway … This project aims to create
the conditions under which the “theory” can be realised and can function: a
programme of the methodical destruction of collectives.

It has been pursued as a moral and political project to denounce collective
action, especially socialism, as a threat to capitalism and as a greater threat
than capitalism could ever be. This is the case especially when it comes to
conservative political parties.

This thought collective was centred on the Mont Pelerin Society and other sites
including a range of free market and/or conservative think tanks like the
Institute of Economic Affairs (UK – est. 1955).

Both economic and moral ideas are central to any understanding of neoliberalism.

It is important to note that neoliberals like Friedrich Hayek and Milton
Friedman based much of their theoretical work on the argument that price
stability is critical for the proper functioning of markets.

Therefore, it’s important to control inflation in order to ensure that prices
remain stable.

What this meant – and still means – was that neoliberals tended to focus on
monetary policy – that is, the control of the money supply and inflation as the
key site of theoretical engagement with other political-economic perspectives
like Keynesianism. It is also seen as the key site of government or policy
intervention.

Many things that are now identified as neoliberal – e.g. privatization of
national industries and public utilities, liberalization of trade and capital
movement, deregulation, etc. – have one thing in common; they are premised on a
particular understanding of the economy in which the stability of money and the
dangers of inflation are key concerns.

Neoliberals feared that Keynesian ideas and policies would entrench an
inflationary cycle as inflation was used to control rising real wages, which
were rising in response to the growing political influence of workers and trades
unions. It was easier for governments to use inflation to keep real wages down
because wage restraints or moderation could lead to serious industrial
conflicts.

According to neoliberals like Hayek, however, the inflationary pressures from
these wage demands of trades unions would ratchet up with no end in sight,
meaning that the stability of money would be eroded leading to the collapse of
markets as they would no longer be able to function properly.

Governments would have to step in and assert control over wages and prices,
raising fears about totalitarianism.

Monetary policy relates to the money supply; literally the amount of money in an
economy.

What monetarists expect is that controlling the money supply will control price
inflation since it will mean that no more money is allowed into circulation.

Neoliberals want to institute monetarism because it involves letting markets
function ‘to find’ the ‘correct’ price of money (i.e. interest rate) rather than
governments setting interest rates in pursuit of government policies, whether
this is full employment or inflation control.

While monetarism was a powerful idea to beat Keynesianism with, it proved an
utter failure when policy-makers attempted to implement these ideas as policy.

As an idea, monetarism failed. When there were attempts to implement it, this
did not lead to price stability.

Attempts to tighten government spending represent another example of how
neoliberal ideas have failed to be translated.

Even governments like those of Reagan and Thatcher failed to cut public spending
as originally desired.

Like Reagan, Thatcher sought to cut taxes immediately upon her electoral
victory.

What followed was the decimation of British industry as whole sections of the
British population were thrown onto the (employment) scrap heap as unemployment
stripped communities of jobs and resources.

Raising unemployment was an extremely desirable way of reducing the strength of
the working classes.

More specifically, it was very much tied to existing political preferences like
reducing government spending and privatizing state-owned enterprises as part of
a wider attack on the electoral base of the Labour Party.

The capture of the money supply by private (and unregulated) banks has meant
that governments have essentially lost control of their ability to reduce their
public debt by inflating their economies.

It has created a system of state-sponsored transfers of money from taxpayers to
financial investors, whether these are financial elites or individual
policy-holders.

“Instead of being taxed to pay for public goods, the wealthy loaned governments
money to finance deficits”.

What is important to remember is that inflation was not curtailed by monetarism,
which was not successfully implemented; rather, it was curtailed through the
expansion of the public debt.

What resulted was the tying of ourselves to a massive Ponzi-scheme in which we
became dependent on ever rising asset prices as asset-inflation came to replace
price-inflation.

My purpose here, as elsewhere in this book, is to illustrate how we need to
rethink neoliberalism – so, rather than assume that it is the cause of the
global financial crisis, I want to argue that we might need to find another
cause altogether. Put simply, my contention is that neoliberalism has not driven
political-economic change over the last 40 years, it has merely legitimated it.

The aim of this chapter then is to illustrate this claim with a simple question:
how did we get to a situation during the GFC where there were corporations
‘too-big-to-fail’ when the original neoliberal thinkers actually held
antithetical views of such corporate monopolis and concentrations of economic
power?

How have monopoly levels changed over time? What has this meant for our
economies? These are critical questions, especially as they relate to the
increasing concentration of economic power in fewer and fewer hands and the
corresponding emergence of financial institutions that are ‘too-big-to-fail’.

Neoliberalism didn't promote the rise of corporate monopolies, championed by a
new wave of radical thinking bubbling up from the offices of economists and
others at the University of Chicago; instead, existing corporate monopolies led
neoliberals to seek ways to defend corporate monopoly against attacks by New
Deal advocates, socialists and the likes.

The point of the discussion above is to highlight the fact that financialization
involves more than the top 1%. Institutional investors represent the money of
‘Joe and Jane Public’ invested in their pensions, savings accounts, insurance
funds, and so on. It is not just the top echelons of society who are invested
(socially, politically, personally) in the financialized transformation of
society.

What has happened in the US, UK and Canada has necessitated the enrolment of
broad swathes of society; the working and middle classes are tied into the
extension of home ownership, pensions and other financial assets. We are all
complicit in the financialization of the economy, whether or not we have been
directly responsible for the imposition of particular ideas, policies or other
activities.

So when we talk about businesses being too-big-to-fail , what we are really
talking about is the systemic inter-dependencies that engender and reinforce
instability. [\*](#ASIN:B00SI6J9WI;LOC:1363)

The dominance of corporate monopolies and the concentration of financial assets
in the hands of a few massive institutional investors have contributed to the
systemic instabilities that led to the GFC, and which we continue to face.

What matters is that we are supposed to be living in democratic societies where
the decisions of the populace determine the various policies we end up living
under. If we lose power over our lives, we lose power whether or not someone
else is making benign or malign choices.

In this chapter, I focus especially on the changes that have happened to
corporate governance over this period of time because I want to highlight
possible targets for activism, protest and dissent.

Neoliberalism is not one thing, one policy, one regime. The intellectual project
of Hayek, Friedman and the like was replaced by more specific state projects
pursued by Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher and Brian Mulroney.

This was then superseded by an attempt to resolve the negative consequences
(e.g. unemployment) characteristic of centre-left governments in the 1990s,
especially those of President Bill Clinton and Prime Minister Tony Blair,
providing support for the important argument that neoliberalism does not equal
conservatism.

\*\*\*

The idea that neoliberalism is a process means we lose any concrete sense of who
is responsible for the implementation of market-based mechanisms, instruments
and incentives*.*

In one case it might be city officials, in another global business elites, in
another do-gooder conservationists, and so on. Consequently there is no target
for our ire, or at least no easy target for our ire, which might explain why
popular movements have recently focused on the top 1% – whether the top 1% are
symbolic or concrete is beside the point, at least they’re a target we can all
identify.

So, rather than making broad claims about society (macro) or specific claims
about individuals (micro), my argument is that we can identify key organizations
and their impacts on society without losing sight of what is responsible (e.g.
corporations) or succumbing to the idea of our helplessness in the face of
overwhelming odds.

It is not market-like rule we have seen emerge over the last 30-40 years, it is
the opposite, or monopoly-like rule.

Assets are central to the corporate dimension of our economies because
businesses are defined by their assets, as well as liabilities – moreover,
corporations and other businesses are themselves assets to their investors.

What assetization has involved is the rising dominance of asset-holder interests
over all other interests when it comes to organizing and running corporations.

This dominance of asset-holder interests is known as shareholder value
maximization, an “ideology” that underpins corporate governance and the drive to
ramp up share prices.

Corporations are not ‘real entities’ but instead a ‘nexus of contracts’ in which
the interests of shareholders, as owners of (investment) capital (but not the
firm itself), is paramount.

Intangible assets now represent 80% of the value of the biggest businesses, a
reversal from the 1970s when tangible assets represented 80% of this value.

The rise of intangible assets has driven policy-making in many countries towards
the notion of knowledge economies. As a result neoliberal ideas are tied to this
rise of intangible assets.

One reason they are related is that corporate monopolies are enabled and
reinforced by intangible assets as emerging intellectual property rights (IPRs)
mean that such assets are now easier to enclose behind private property rights.

What has happened is that corporations have been turned into assets whose value
needs to keep rising forever; this is because their share value represents the
assets of institutional investors who are dependent on these rising asset values
to ensure returns for their constituents (e.g. pensioners, savers, insurees,
etc.).

What we have to appreciate is that the economy is not a ‘real’ thing waiting out
there for us to discover and explain by observing what happens when people
engage in economic activity. The economy is a construction of our daily
decisions and – this is vital – the ideas we use to explain the reasons, effects
and relationships about these decisions.

What I wanted to get across in this chapter is that thinking about neoliberalism
as a process misses two major things: first, it leaves us with little concrete
sense of who is responsible for implementing neoliberal ideas and policies,
second, it ignores a key agent of political-economic change over the last half
century, the corporation.

Corporations have effectively become like the state,massive monopolies,
controlling the allocation and distribution of resources within and between
countries around the world, as well as the lives and livelihoods of millions of
workers, customers, etc.

These massive corporations dominate employment, revenues, assets, profits and
various other indicators we use to represent healthy economies.

Corporate monopoly and restructuring has led us to become more governed rather
than less governed, although in this case it’s supposedly private organizations
rather than the state doing the governing.

\*\*\*

In this chapter I focus on the target of recent popular criticism, namely the
top 1% of income earners and wealth holders.

Basically, I’m going to make the point that the top 1% have not got where they
are without our help; sometimes this has been conscious and sometimes it has
been unintentional.

I’m not giving leftist activists, teachers and scholars a free pass on this
front, we have all been complicit.

From this analysis I end the chapter with a manifesto for change.

I want you, as the reader, to go away with a more optimistic sense of what we
can do to change the world, rather than simply be overwhelmed by the image of
‘neoliberalism’.

At every point in our lives we can find holes, gaps, weak spots, spaces where we
might wage a guerrilla defence against the ‘free’ market and, more crucially,
against monopoly, or even where we might mount outright assaults on the bastions
of corporate power.

What we have here is an inequality that boggles the mind. It’s no wonder that
people are so angry, although why they weren't angry before the global financial
crisis (GFC) is worth thinking about.

We have to ask, what would make governments take notice of a majority rather
than the top 1%? Without debt, our economies would largely cease to function
since it would lead to severe limits on house purchasing and consumption – the
two driving forces of the UK, USA and Canadian economies.

The state is deeply implicated in all that has happened; it has heavily
subsidized the assetization of our economies.

Asking what might make governments rethink their policies is critical, in my
opinion.

It’s the ideas, interests and demands of the top 1% that currently dominate
politicians’ and policy-makers’ minds; it’s not the needs of the majority, or of
proponents of alternatives to capitalism, or even of conservatives demanding an
end to government intervention and central banking.

What can we do about it? Is neoliberalism responsible? Is it all the fault of
the top 1%? My answer to the last of these is that it’s not, we all bear some
responsibility in one way or another – well, in one way specifically.

As people in the US, UK and Canada increasingly bought into the home-owner dream
– now nightmare for many – from the 1970s onwards, they also increasingly bought
into a set of ideas about how our economies should be run; that is, keep
wage-inflation low, bump up asset-inflation and home-owners win every time –
well, until recently.

What I’m claiming is that inequality is directly tied into rising
home-ownership.

Sometimes people find it quite threatening when I tell them I don't want to buy
a house, especially when I outline why this is so.

To me it’s more than strange that we all buy into the mass hysteria of
home-ownership; it’s also socially unjust.

However, this housing delusion is not as simply as it may first appear: First: A
mortgage does not mean you own a house nor does it mean you have an asset.
Second: The gains in the house prices you expect from buying a house are not as
significant as you may first think.

Rising house prices have actually done little better than other long-term
investments once inflation is taken into account.

We’ve basically ended up in a political-economic system that militates against
rising real wages and rising livings standards for the poorer members of society
because to do so would threaten the value of the assets (e.g. houses, pensions,
etc.) of the wealthier members of society. And here I’m not talking about the
top 1%, I mean the nearly 70% of households that are owner-occupiers.

Ultimately, we are left with the majority of people concerned more with making
sure that no one threatens rising asset values and makes sure that the value of
those assets rises faster than wage-inflation – that is, our salaries and wages.

The transformation of our economies since the 1970s has been built on a
delusional narrative of housing ownership, alongside other assets. This delusion
necessitates stagnant real wages in order to ensure that house price inflation
rises faster than general inflation.

This brings me to the main purpose of this chapter.
[\*](#ASIN:B00SI6J9WI;LOC:2637)

Future generations of American, Brits and Canadians will be paying off the
public, private and corporate debts built up over the last few years as a
consequence of the bailouts of all the financial institutions and their
employees, executives and shareholders.

It will be you, the so-called “millennials” born in the last two to three
decades who will bear the brunt of the adjustment – on top of which you will
face possible environmental catastrophe and fossil fuel bubble unless our
governments get off their collective arses and do something about it, and soon.

Don't buy into this crap, you don't have to. On the one hand you can become
willing dupes in the Ponzi scheme that is the housing market, and on the other
you can become indentured serfs through student loans.

My suggestion is really rather simple. Refuse to pay interest, refuse to borrow
money to finance your lives, stop the cycle of credit. That’s my suggestion for
future generations; opt out of debt-bondage and servitude. That’s it – not very
earth shattering, is it? [\*](#ASIN:B00SI6J9WI;LOC:2656)

Stop borrowing money, stop getting into debt, stop paying interest on those
loans, and then see what happens.

The real problem is lack of work, however.

Young people coming onto the labour market since the GFC are screwed, to be
blunt about it. Doubly screwed, in fact, since you’ll face pressure to pay back
your student loans while working in low-paid and often temporary positions; if
you’re lucky enough to find work at all, that is.

It is important to note that we’ve all ended up tied into the assetization of
our economies. We are now dependent on our housing, pensions, savings and
insurance premiums for our standards of living.

Changing the current financial system poses real threats to all sorts of people,
not just the top 1%.

It will probably mean lots of things that have become unpalatable to the
dominant narrative of ever-rising asset values and rising wealth. But, at heart,
what it means is that we have to separate our interests from those of the top
1%, and we have to do it actively and concertedly because no one else will do it
for us.

It’s not about asking someone else for something or demanding they give up what
they have, it’s about changing your expectations, desires and choices in order
to make what you want happen. You should be telling the rest of the world that
you no longer want to sustain the collective delusions that brought us to the
brink of financial collapse; rather, you want to remake the financial system by
moving your position within it, whatever that may be.

More simply, it should say ‘we will not pay the interest you need to maintain
your economic system’. Just say no to paying interest!

The starting point for this book was that much of the literature and debate
about neoliberalism has missed, ignored or misunderstood the importance of
corporations, and other business organizations, in the economy.
[\*](#ASIN:B00SI6J9WI;LOC:2919)

We don't live in a free market society, let alone a neoliberal one where the
market mechanism has replaced every other social institution.

Most economic activity actually takes place inside economic organizations and
not within markets. This is a crucial point when we discuss neoliberalism, yet
isn't really considered by critical thinkers.

What has really characterized the last few decades are rationalities, ideas,
policies and processes that have been about freeing-the-monopolies, not
promoting free markets.

As corporate monopolies have come to dominate our economies, they have been
roundly cheered on by supposedly neoliberal thinkers who reversed their
criticism of corporate monopoly.

This brings me to the final point I want to make in this book. As I said above,
one question worth asking right now is; if we were and are not neoliberal, are
we going to become [\*](#ASIN:B00SI6J9WI;LOC:2996) neoliberal now as a result of
the GFC?

What if, accepting that neoliberalism hasn't taken over the world already, we
then consider what happens if neoliberalism does actually take over the world
now. What would the world look like if it was dominated by markets and not large
corporations? The short answer is not better than now or the recent past.

I’d like to end on a positive note and so will turn to Karl Polanyi for why
things will work themselves out in some acceptable form.

He wrote about the unconscious and unplanned popular response to the damage
caused by unfettered capitalism. It’s what we’re seeing now in countries
throughout the world.

People will only take so much shit before they revolt, and the amount of shit
they are drowning in right now is too much. What has happened since 2007 has
left us all with a nasty taste in our mouths and, hopefully, a desire to do
something about it.

[amzn:B00SI6J9WI]

