Why Are We The Good Guys
========================

By **David Cromwell**

In the version of democracy that we are used to, every five years or so we enter
a polling booth and choose a politician from a mostly narrow choice of political
parties presented to us at a general election. We then let the victor get on
with ruling us until the next time the parties want our votes. In the meantime,
powerful industries and business investors spend considerable amounts of money
in secretive lobbying, persuading, cajoling and needling politicians to pursue
polices that are, in effect, corporate welfare programmes. Corporations and
banks receive huge public subsidies and bailouts, while the rest of us are
largely left to the cold, biting winds of ‘market’ economics. It’s socialism for
the rich and capitalism for the rest of us.

The BBC regularly churns out a diet of pre-digested pabulum that props up
power…The consequences for humanity of media propaganda have proven calamitous
and, as the world slides ever further to the abyss of catastrophic climate
change, could yet be terminal.

It is only be reading behind the issues – whether the Middle East, the global
economy, environment destruction – so fleetingly and confusingly presented in
news bulletins, press articles and conventional debate, that real understanding
begins to dawn…And the distortion is systematic: it favours the elite view of
Dowling Street, Whitehall, the White House, the Pentagon, big corporations,
investors and bankers; not the ground-level view of marginalised communities,
people struggling just to survive, the poor, or those unfortunates in the
crosshairs of Western firepower.

Mark Curtis [author Unpeople etc.] estimates conservatively that Britain alone
bears ‘direct responsibility’ for the deaths of 4-6 million people worldwide
since 1945.

The question of just how benign *are* the great Western powers, with their proud
notions of democracy, fair play and respect for law and order, simply does not
arise. Politicians and privileged commentators relentlessly proclaim ‘our’
virtues, in defiance of the documentary record. The required Orwellian feat of
doublethink is impressive.

The depiction of reality presented in this book is such a disturbing notion that
many would rather reject it outright than question the patriotic propaganda we
are fed daily by the media. But then George Orwell once wrote, ‘If liberty means
anything at all, it means the right the tell people what they don't want to
hear.’

This is all part of a bigger picture of the West’s role in condoning and
promoting terror around the world. Since the Second World War, as Edward Herman
has noted, such a policy has been used regularly to create governments of terror
that quickly opened their doors to foreign investment and keep labour markets as
‘flexible’ as the transnationals and IMF might desire.

And it is all supported by a largely uncritical media…the propaganda system
works extremely well providing Big Brother-quality results under a system of
‘freedom’.

Many honourable BBC professionals, and other journalists, do their best within
the constraints of a globalised political and economic system that makes honest
reporting all but impossible. However, it is important to illuminate the
systematic bias of compromised reporting which promotes the subordination of the
people and the planet for profit…when the prevailing untruths may lead to a
catastrophe because they blind people to the real dangers and possibilities.

The UK media was a central element in portraying to the British public the
illusion of Blair as a benevolent figure of moral and political authority,
struggling to do ‘the right thing’.

Leading British politicians are shielded from uncomfortable truths by a faithful
retinue of mainstream journalists and commentators and, for the most part, by an
educated elite in academia for whom any deviation from the guiding principals of
basic British decency and goodwill is all too often inconceivable.

Since 1945, rather than occasionally deviating from the promotion of peace,
democracy, human rights and economic development in the Third World, British
(and US) foreign policy has been systematically opposed to them, whether the
Conservatives or Labour (or Republicans or Democrats) have been in power.

Senior BBC mangers and editors do not have to be told to support the
government’s most critical items; it comes naturally to them, otherwise they
never would have been filtered into their comfortable, elevated,
establishment-friendly positions.

In December 2011, President Obama declared an official end to the war in Iraq at
Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland. As Obama looked on approvingly, General
Lloyd Austin, the top US commander in Iraq, declared: ‘What our troops have
achieved in Iraq over the course of nearly nine years is truly remarkable.
Together with our coalition partners and corps of dedicated civilians, they
removed a brutal dictator and gave the Iraq people their freedom.’ As writer
Joseph Kishore noted: ‘Field Marshal Goring could not have put it better in
speaking of the ‘liberation’ of Poland.’

After the huge propaganda campaign founded on lies and deceptions about Iraq,
media professionals have seemingly learned nothing about the responsibilities of
journalists. Indeed, as Iran replaces Iraq in the crosshairs of Western
firepower, it is clear that very little has changed. The media is once again on
hand to channel the fear-mongering propaganda emanating from Washington and
London.

Rageh Omarr reported on the war for BBC News from Baghdad, where he described
the arrival of the invading troops as ‘a liberation.’ In 2010, four years after
he left the BBC, he told John Pilger: “I didn't really do my job properly. I’d
hold my hand up and say that one didn't press the most uncomfortable buttons
hard enough.” With admirable frankness, he described BBC news coverage as ‘a
giant echo chamber’ for military propaganda.

News coverage, we are told, is balanced and fair; all important views are
properly represented. The media did their job properly on Iraq, and we can all
relax. That’s the message the British public was supposed to accept. In reality,
news broadcasters and the press failed in their public duty to hold power to
account. Worse that that, they acted as campaign managers for an illegal and
immoral war; itself, merely the latest in a long list of murderous foreign
interventions.

In 2009, Richard Beeston, foreign editor of *The Times*, wrote dismissively of
attempts to unravel how and why the country was dragged into an illegal war in
Iraq: ‘All this happened six years ago. Get over it.’

In the eighteenth century, Adam Smith observed that the ‘merchants and
manufactures’ were ‘the principal architects’ of state policy, and made sure
that their own interests ‘were most peculiarly attended to, however grievous the
effects on others, whether at home or abroad.’

How can those who govern keep those who are governed away from the levers of
power? In ‘free’ societies, by definition, ruling elites lack the option of
‘chains of iron’ to bound the public rabble. Instead, a devotion to mass
consumerism, and an unthinking – or at least begrudging – acceptance of the
inequitable distribution of power, must be inculcated and maintained by a
constant stream of state-corporate propaganda.

In a remarkable study of how the huge Hollywood film industry perpetuates the
myth of the US as a beacon of democracy and a force for good around the world,
Mathew Alford notes that: ‘The concept of a benevolent US foreign policy emerges
from the widespread historic belief in “American exceptionalism,” which
describes the belief that the US in an extraordinary nation with a special role
to play in human history; that is, America in not only unique but also superior
among nations.’

The pattern extends solidly back through history as Noam Chomsky, for example,
has repeatedly pointed out. He notes the crucial importance to state and
corporate power of keeping the public confused and remote from any real
influence. ‘One fundamental gaol of any well-crafted indoctrination program is
to direct attention elsewhere, away from effective power, its roots, and the
disguises it assumes.’

Fear of genuine democracy, at home and abroad, is a familiar theme in
establishment circles everywhere. Sometimes it slips out into the open. In the
year after the Iraq invasion, Tony Blair said bluntly; “We can't end up having
public inquiry into whether the war was right or wrong. That is something we
have to decide. We are the politicians.”

The mantra of ‘failing to act,’ the framing of the climate debate favoured by
the Royal Society and other establishment voices, is a persistent cover-up of
the truth. What is fundamentally missing from the analysis of…commentators with
media friendly profiles is the dangerous driving force of state-corporate greed
that is accelerating the danger of societal collapse under climate chaos. What
is also missing from the mainstream debate is the potential for mass grassroots
action to challenge this dangerous greed and to invert current state-corporate
priorities in order to benefit humanity and ecosystems.

And for anyone in a public position to speak out against the current direction
in science policy, never mind government priorities generally – foreign policy,
the economy, domestic and international poverty – is to be marked as a
‘troublemaker’ or worse. Far easier to go with the flow, address the priorities
driven from on high and keep your mouth shut to avoid offending reigning
sensibilities.

It should be clear by now that there is already intolerable pressure on the
environment and on global human security as a result of the extraction of
natural resources such as oil and natural gas – a major factor behind the US
government’s smokescreen of the ‘war on terror’. The additional threats
represented by the spectre of climate change could create unprecedented
political and social upheaval.

A pressing question today is whether national governments will adopt new, even
more strict, authoritarian measures to limit personal freedom…in order to
protect ‘homeland security.’ Will the elite political and corporate forces that
are directing economic globalisation for their own ends adopt uncompromising and
awful measures to perpetuate global capitalism in the 21st century?

Janet Redman, of the Washington based Institute for Political Studies, spoke the
unadorned truth that is so painful, if not impossible, for the corporate media
to acknowledge: “What some see as an inaction is in fact a demonstration of the
palpable failure of our current economic system to address economic, social or
environmental crisis.”

No wonder then that the corporate media, including the ‘impartial’ BBC, rarely
address unsustainable economic growth on a finite planet; or the links between
likely climate catastrophe and the destructive practices of global corporations,
financial speculators and banks.

Anyone concerned with the future of humanity has a responsibility to speak out
about the crippling factors that are hindering effective action on climate. A
good start to those responsibilities would be to expose the impossibility of the
corporate media performing its mythical fourth-estate role of challenging
powerful interests in society…

*It is arguable that the success of business propaganda in persuading us, for so
long, that we are free from propaganda is one of the most significant propaganda
achievements of the twentieth century (Alex Carey – Taking the Risk Out Of
Democracy).*


Although couched in terms of ‘defence’ and ‘security,’ the projection of the
West’s military might around the globe is more to do with strategic dominance
and opportunities for big business. ‘The hidden hand of the market will never
work without a hidden fist.’

It is little wonder that John Dewey, one of America’s leading philosophers,
describes politics as ‘the shadow cast on society by big business.’

Examination of the historic record reveals that it has always suited the
interests of powerful institutions for the public hand to be kept well away from
the helm of policy; the fear of public opinion is ever-present in the minds of
the ruling classes.

The purpose of the newly burgeoning PR industry was to sell corporate interests
so the public as ‘national interests,’ thus projecting the enormous power and
wealth enjoyed by narrow sector of society: industrialists, investors and their
political allies. Huge propaganda campaigns were designed and implemented to
proclaim the alleged benefits of the capitalist system and to undermine
grassroots efforts to challenge the growth of corporate power.

In the United States, the influential National Association of Manufactures (NAM)
explicitly warned its members, fearful of public resistance to big business,
that: ‘Public policies in our democracy are eventually a reflection of public
opinion, so public opinion must be reshaped if are to avoid disaster.’

Noam Chomsky has expressed succinctly the underlying problem for genuine
democracy, even in so called ‘free’ societies. ‘Remember, any state, *any*
state, has a primary enemy: its own population. No wonder the shocking depth and
historic extent of the systemic corruption of democracy by big business and it’s
political allies remains off the agenda of the corporate media.

No wonder that our major political parties offer no real choice: they all
represent essentially the same interests crushing any moves towards meaningful
public participation in the shaping of policy; towards genuine concern for all
members of society, particularly the weak and the venerable.

With a few ruffled feathers here and there, Western leaders and their faithful
retinue in the media and academia continue to deceive the public about the
global economic crisis and its root causes; because profits and power demand it.
Otherwise these elites run the serious risk of a huge slump in public confidence
in the current system and even in what passes as democratic politics.

Despite the huge scale of yet another financial crisis and the severe global
recession that followed, the major political parties and elite media still
refuse to address seriously even the possibility of fundamental weaknesses and
inequality at the very heart of modern capitalism. In reality, the current
system, driven by private profit far beyond environmental sanity, is incapable
of meeting the needs and aspirations of humanity.

