Why Our Status Quo Failed and Is Beyond Reform
==============================================

By **Charles Hugh Smith**

In this book, I will explain why the status quo—the current pyramid of wealth
and power dominated by the few at the  top—has failed and why the system is
beyond reform.

Though we’re assured our status quo offers equal opportunity to all, the reality
is our status quo exists to protect  the privileges of the few at the expense of
the many.

Why can’t our status quo be reformed? There are two primary reasons: 1) those
benefiting from the current arrangement  will resist any reforms that threaten
their share of the pie—and 2) reforms that actually address the structural
flaws will bring the system down.

This is unwelcome news to privileged insiders, but it is good news for the
planet and everyone else.

Why has the status quo failed? Let’s begin by examining the six great problems
facing humanity.

Entrenched poverty 2. An economic model of expanding consumption in a world of
finite resources 3. An economic model  that relies on wages to distribute the
output of an economy 4. A political-economic model of centralized  banks/states
managing economies 5. An economic model that depends on ever-expanding credit,
i.e. borrowing from the  future, to fund today’s consumption 6. A crisis of
purpose and meaning.

We can constructively view these six problems as facets of one central problem: 
sustainably managing the planet’s  resources so the basics of prosperity are
available to everyone in the global economy.

These six problems are generally viewed through the prism of ideologies that
were formulated in past eras.

Regardless of the ideological starting point, Problems 2, 3, 4 and 5 are
generally viewed as the solution to Problem  1, entrenched poverty.

The ideological differences boil down to debates over how best to spur growth of
consumption and wages, and what role  the state and its central bank play in
boosting growth with easier credit.

How did models that have been widely viewed as solutions become problems?  Let’s
briefly explore each of the six  problems.

**Entrenched Poverty**.

We understand entrenched poverty intuitively: It’s a poverty born of systemic
inequalities of capital, education and  resources.  We also intuitively
understand that inequality generates poverty. If inequality is rising as a
consequence of the way the status quo is structured, the only possible output of
the status quo is poverty: not just  a poverty of income, but of opportunity to
own the sources of wealth, what is known as capital.

The stranglehold that elites have over national economies is a key cause of
wide-spread poverty.

The ultimate sources of poverty are a lack of paid work and productive capital
that is owned by the many rather than  the few.

The conventional solution to poverty is economic growth:

That this idea is no longer working is not just a matter of bad luck or poor
execution.  Its core solutions—expanding  consumption, credit and state
power—actively increase poverty rather than alleviate it.

Even if the state and market boost credit and consumption, this will only speed
the collapse of systems that no  longer function.

**An Economic Model of Expanding Consumption in a World of Finite Resources.**

It seems painfully obvious that Planet Earth and its resources are finite.  Yet
it is only recently in human history  that the scale of human consumption has
reached the point where vast ecosystems such as the world’s oceans are in
danger of collapse.

The dominant metaphor of industrial civilization is the machine, and we have
applied this metaphor to the natural  world:

But the natural world is an ecosystem, not a machine, and ecosystems operate by
different rules than machines.

Conventional economics assume controlling inputs (interest rates, credit, etc.)
will yield the desired output  (permanent growth). But these mechanistic models
have failed, for the reason that economies and societies are  ecosystems, not
simplistic machines.

Humans are designed to solve local depletion of resources by moving on.

For the first time in human history, moving to a new locale is no longer a
solution. There is no place left to move  to.

Fossil fuels have given humanity an immense pool of energy slaves that we use to
do work that is beyond mere human  muscle.

This has fostered the illusion that there are no limits on our consumption:

Cheap fossil fuels have enabled the expansion of inefficient and wasteful
systems such as centralized bureaucracies  and the ideology of consumerism.

Once energy is expensive/ in short supply, these foundations of the status quo
no longer make financial sense.

The current era of low energy costs will end, as demand soars when prices are
low and expanding production depletes  what is left of the cheap-to-access oil.

Central banks can print limitless sums of money, but they can’t print limitless
amounts of energy, phosphate,  lithium, wild fish, etc.

The status quo model that makes expanding consumption the foundation of
prosperity is failing for profoundly systemic  reasons.

It is failing because its assumptions—cheap substitutes are always available,
cheap energy is limitless and machines  can solve any shortage—have intrinsic
limits. This reality deeply offends many people because it violates their core
belief in no limits. There are no limits on the expansion of credit and money
issued by central banks, but there are  limits in the finite real world.

\*\*\*

The number of new jobs created by the rise of digital software is dwarfed by the
number of jobs being lost.

The prime directive of capitalism is the accumulation of capital: enterprises
that fail to accumulate capital go  bust.

In this environment, capital is no longer able to reap big profits, and
companies will be under even more financial  pressure to lower costs by
replacing human labor with automation.

The structural decline of profits is not a temporary phenomenon—it is a
permanent feature of the current version of  global capitalism.

If both wages and profits are in permanent decline, so too are state revenues.
This leads to a sobering conclusion:  wages are no longer an adequate means for
distributing a nation’s income.

Clearly, the status quo policies of deficit spending and monetary stimulus have
failed.

There is no other possible result of elite-dominated economies other than rising
inequality and poverty.

In these economies, the mechanics of democracy may be acted out for
public-relations purposes.

Any group that attempts to wrest power away from the elites is ruthlessly
suppressed or marginalized.

Centralization is the leverage elites need to establish and maintain control of
the nation’s income and wealth.

Unfortunately, centralized, hierarchical institutions fail.

Higher education has eroded to the point that there is no accountability for its
failure.

This is total systemic failure.

Student loans have created a vast class of student debt-serfs who must pay
interest on their loans for much of their  productive lives by a political
system that serves financial elites.

This is a thoroughly corrupt system in which institutions have lost their way
but retain expertise in enriching  insiders.

The state and central bank have institutionalized the speculative excesses of
financialization to further their own  power at the expense of the majority
whose wealth and income have been strip-mined by financialization.

There is no possible outcome of this system other than collapse.

The way the status quo creates and distributes money insures that wealth becomes
concentrated in the hands of the  few

Once this arrangement takes hold, democracy dies. This is the status quo in a
nutshell.

\*\*\*

The loss of purpose, meaning, positive social roles and community are not unique
to any one nation or culture; they  are manifesting across the globe, despite
rising wealth and material well-being.

The status quo is not only failing to solve humanity’s six critical problems—the
status quo is itself the  problem.

The only way to solve these problems is to create an alternative system with
entirely different foundations, values  and processes.

In the status quo, all money is created and distributed at the top of the
power/wealth pyramid—by central banks, the  Treasury and private banks.  The
only way anyone in the bottom 99.5% of the pyramid can get any of this new money
is  to borrow it from a bank at a high rate of interest. Only the wealthy and
powerful have access to the nearly free  money issued by central banks.  The
financial Aristocracy can borrow essentially limitless amounts of money at 1%
and use it to:

Buy assets elsewhere in the world yielding 5% or more.

Buy back corporate stocks, pushing stock prices higher and reaping billions of
dollars in profits

Outbid everyone without access to the central bank’s nearly free money for
income-producing assets such as rental  housing

Loan money to students, people buying auto and homes or charging purchases on
credit cards, etc. at rates that that  are as high as 10% or even 20%.

No one in the bottom 99.5% of the wealth/power pyramid can borrow money for 1%
and then use the money to lock in  immense profits.

If money is created and distributed at the top of the wealth/power pyramid, the
only possible result is  the rich get richer and everyone else gets poorer


This is why the only possible result of the status quo is rising wealth
inequality and poverty.

Central banks and Treasuries are political institutions, and as a result the
flow of new money is ultimately a  political process.

Though central banks claim to be above the political fray, private interests can
influence the distribution of the  central bank-issued credit money with
relatively modest sums of lobbying.

The wealthy buy political influence. They have a monopoly on all new money,
which flows only to private banks and  financiers.

All the income-producing assets end up in the hands of the wealthy.

If we don’t change the way we create and distribute money, we change nothing.

None of the existing money systems address the root causes of inequality and
poverty. This is because money is  considered to be apolitical.

But as I have shown, money is always and everywhere intrinsically political

What is needed is a mechanism that ties the creation of money to the one thing
people mired in poverty have, which is  their time and labor.

In the carefully choreographed universe of the status quo, poverty has nothing
to do with how money is created and  distributed.

The fact that every conventional money system generates poverty is attributed
not to the money system but to external  factors.

The only way to wrest control from elites is to take the power to create and
distribute money away from them.

\*\*\*

The status quo has two solutions for every problem: the market and the state.
Whatever the market can’t fix, the  state can fix.  These are the only
recognized systems and the only recognized solutions.

Attempting to solve every problem with the market and the state destroys the
planet and the economy.

Since the status quo doesn’t measure life-cycle costs, the future value of
what’s been destroyed to reap short-term  profits, well-being or sustainability,
the result is a destructive tyranny of maximizing profit today.

There is nothing in the structure of markets that incentivizes sustainable
prosperity for all. The belief that the  invisible hand of self-interest will
inevitably foster a sustainable economy is magical thinking.

Neither the market nor the state has any solution for the systemic replacement
of human labor by automation and  commoditization’s relentless downward pressure
on profits.

The state, firmly in the grasp of self-serving elites and vested interests,
serves those interests, not the common  good.

The will spend just enough bread and circuses to keep the populace politically
passive. The rest of state revenues  are devoted to paying interest on the
state’s ballooning debt and rewarding the elites and vested interests that
control the state.

The status quo is based on the faith that profits and employment will always
expand, and as a direct result so will  state revenues. As we have seen, these
dynamics have reversed, and both profits and employment are in structural
decline.

The status quo (neoliberal) fantasy is that every good and service can become a
profitable market of transactions and  wages which generate tax revenues for the
state.

The problem with the neoliberal/state fantasy is that only the top 5% of
households can afford the lifestyle without  going deeply into debt.

The idea that the market and state can transform every aspect of human activity
into a profitable venture that  generates tax revenues for the state is not just
detached from reality—it ignores what’s actually important:  sustainable
well-being.

Capital has no loyalty to anything but its own expansion, and the damage it
leaves in its wake is of no concern to  the owners of capital.

Measuring inflation and deflation locally is meaningless in a globalized
economy.

Globalization creates imbalances that fuel a perpetual instability that
gradually impoverishes every sector other  than global capital, which being
mobile, can exploit the imbalances for its own profit.

We identified four global models that the status quo holds up as solutions but
which have become our most destructive  systemic problems.

An economic model of expanding consumption in a world of finite resources

An economic model that relies on wages to distribute the output of an economy.

A political-economic model of centralized states managing economies An economic
model that depends on ever-expanding  credit

Each of these models is breaking down for structural reasons.

We are now in a position to see that the source of inequality and poverty is the
centralization of wealth and power  in finance and the state--specifically, the
institutionalization of centralized control of money and credit and the
leverage this centralization of power and wealth offers self-serving elites.

To understand why this is so, we turn to the ontological imperative of a system
or institution. The ontological  imperative of the state is to expand its
control.

Once the State has expanded beyond the control of the citizenry, it becomes the
target of those seeking to leverage  its power to their own personal advantage.

The ontological imperative of capital is to secure profits by limiting
competition and gaining access to the central  bank’s money spigot.  The
cheapest way to secure profits is to influence the state to limit competition
and be first  in line to the central bank’s money spigot.

The ontological imperative of privileged elites is to skim as much of the
national income as possible. This  is how nations fail: centralized power
attracts elites who then steer the state and its central bank to serve their
interests, at the expense of everyone below the apex of power.


How economies function is based on a simple theoretical binary: there are only
two analytic camps to choose from,  capitalism or Marxism. Both systems have
failed in the real world.

In effect, both economic orthodoxies are blind to the two key realities
governing our future: automation and the  limits on consumption imposed by a
finite planet.

Markets have no incentives or mechanisms for creating social orders to replace
those that have been dismantled, other  than the market itself.

Whatever yields more profit and expands capital by any means is superior and
thus inevitable.

This dismantling of existing orders is not even understood as destruction; the
market reduces the process of  destruction to a cost of doing business.

Not only do markets not recognize any value in the social orders being
destroyed;  they are viewed as hindrances to more profitable modes of
production.

Democracy and political legitimacy do not register as having value in the
market.

Given the imperative of the market, democracy and political legitimacy are
hindrances rather than treasures, and this  is the source of the status quo’s
teleological imperative to maintain facades of democracy and political
legitimacy  in the public sphere.

The pathologies generated by the market are internalized within each individual
as a loss of purpose, meaning,  self-worth and selfhood.

The failure to create value in the market is perceived as a personal failure
rather than the failure of the  system.

Stripped of the financial rewards of work, the unemployed are also deprived of
purpose, meaning and a positive role  in society.

This ceaseless disruption of the social order generates an deep-seated
insecurity that the status quo can never  erase.

That this artificial, unsustainable and deeply impoverished system is incapable
of constructing a healthy, productive  social order is of no concern to those
profiting from the ascendency of the market.

The language of neoliberalism takes pieces of classical capitalism and
transforms them into a moral system that is  presented as the solution to every
social or economic problem.

These concepts act as a sort of linguistic poison that reduces everything in
human existence to a  speculative drive for private gain.


No sense can be made of anything except as the workings of a speculative market
that places a premium on maximizing  private gain.

Neoliberalism doesn’t simply make room for markets; the end-point of this system
is concentrated wealth and power  that rigs the market to benefit the few at the
expense of the many.

This is feudalism but without the stability and relative security of feudalism.
The debt-serfs cannot depend on  lifelong employment or shelter.

The implicit moral imperative of neoliberalism is very simple: maximizing profit
is the highest good. Amarket in  which participants seek to maximize their
private gain is the ideal solution to all problems.

Affirming one’s value and identity are difficult in an institutional setting,
but they become nearly impossible for  those who have no paid position in the
workforce.

It is assumed to be not just the way the world works, but the only way it could
possibly work.

The system offers one source of selfhood, identity and self-worth: what we
consume, buy, wear and present to the  world. Consumerism is held out as the one
source of self that is accessible and that we can control.

The end-state of unsustainable systems is collapse.

Leaders face a no-win dilemma: any change of course will crash the system, but
maintaining the current course will  also crash the system.

The initial stage of collapse is decay: services become unreliable; shortages
appear, households react defensively by  hoarding essentials and cash, and the
state increases its repression of dissent.

When the privileged class locks up all the top rungs for its cronies, the status
quo crumbles under the weight of  incompetence, while the best and the brightest
drop out of the economy or seek outlets for their ambition  elsewhere.

The status quo can decay for quite some time before systems break down. The key
takeaway here is the process of  collapse is inevitable.

In conclusion: the belief that the status quo is sustainable is a fantasy.

I hope after reading this book you now realize the collapse of the status quo is
necessary to save what’s left of the  planet and clear the way for more
sustainable systems to arise.

Solutions abound. We just need to reach for them.

